Costa Rica: An Overview

Costa Rica, a Central American nation of 4.9 million 
people, historically has been an outpost of political and 
economic stability in an often turbulent region. The United 
States has worked closely with the country to address 
challenges in Central America and to advance shared 
values, such as democracy and human rights, worldwide. 

Political Situation 
Costa Rica has sustained continuous civilian democratic 
governance since 1949, when the country adopted a new 
constitution in the aftermath of a short but violent civil war. 
Postwar politics were dominated by the center-left (now 
centrist) National Liberation Party (PLN) and a center-right 
opposition that ultimately became the Social Christian 
Unity Party (PUSC). The two-party system has collapsed 
over the past 20 years, however, as many Costa Ricans have 
grown disenchanted with the country’s political class and 
have abandoned the traditional parties. This shift has 
allowed newer political forces to contest power, such as the 
center-left Citizens’ Action Party (PAC), which has won 
the past two presidential elections. It also has made 
governance more challenging, as party fragmentation in the 
Legislative Assembly has led to increased gridlock. 

Carlos Alvarado of the ruling PAC was elected president 
with nearly 61% of the vote in a second-round runoff 
election on April 1, 2018. He defeated Fabricio Alvarado of 
the conservative National Restoration Party (PRN), who 
had surged to a first place finish in the first-round election 
after he called for Costa Rica to withdraw from the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights in response to the court’s 
advisory opinion that Costa Rica should legalize same-sex 
marriage. President Alvarado is a 38-year-old author who 
previously served as Minister of Human Development and 
Social Inclusion and as Minister of Labor and Social 
Security under President Luis Guillermo Solís (2014-2018). 
Solís was constitutionally ineligible to seek reelection. 

Following his May 8, 2018, inauguration to a four-year 
term, President Alvarado pledged to strengthen the 
education and health systems, improve citizen security, 
invest in infrastructure, generate increased employment, 
reduce the fiscal deficit, and foster a transition to clean 
energy. Alvarado also appointed a multiparty Cabinet that 
includes several PUSC and PLN ministers, recognizing that 
he will need to forge broad coalitions to pass his policy 
agenda. The PAC holds 10 of 57 seats in the unicameral 
Legislative Assembly; the PLN holds 17 seats, the PRN 
holds 14, and the PUSC holds 9. The remaining seven seats 
are divided among three other parties. 

June 11, 2018

period, the Costa Rican government increased public-sector 
employment, established one of the most comprehensive 
social safety nets in Latin America, and supported local 
producers with subsidies and trade barriers. Those policies 
contributed to a rapid expansion of the economy; however, 
a deep recession from 1980 to 1982 led Costa Rica to adopt 
a new economic strategy. The country privatized the 
majority of its state-owned enterprises, adopted free-trade 
zones to attract investment, and gradually opened the 
domestic market to foreign competition.  

Figure 1. Costa Rica at a Glance 

Sources: CRS Graphics, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos; 
Centro de Investigación y Estudios Políticos; International Monetary 
Fund; Global Trade Atlas. 

Costa Rica has experienced considerable growth since 
adopting the more outward-oriented economic strategy, but 
many Costa Ricans are dissatisfied with the economy. The 
country’s labor market has grown increasingly divided 
between those involved in newer sectors—such as high-
tech manufacturing, tourism, and business services—that 
provide higher pay and rising wages and those involved in 
more traditional sectors that struggle to compete with 
imports and provide lower pay and more precarious 
employment conditions. Government statistics indicate that 
about 10% of Costa Ricans are unemployed and nearly 45% 
lack job protections and benefits because they work in the 
untaxed and unregulated informal sector. Moreover, 20% of 
Costa Rican households live below the poverty line. Costa 
Rica’s extensive social welfare expenditures—equivalent to 
23% of gross domestic product (GDP)—have helped 
alleviate these challenges, but higher levels of 
unemployment and informality have eroded the tax base 
necessary to sustain the social safety net. 

Economic and Social Conditions 
Costa Rica pursued state-led development throughout much 
of the 20th century, but since the1980s it has implemented 
market-oriented economic policies. In the post-civil war 

President Alvarado has called for a variety of public 
investments to foster economic growth and improve social 
welfare in the rural and coastal regions of Costa Rica that 
have benefitted the least from changes in the economy. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 
 
Nevertheless, he has indicated that reducing the budget 
deficit is his top priority. The Costa Rican government has 
run large deficits since a 2009 recession, and interest 
payments on the debt have risen from 2% of GDP to 3.9% 
of GDP over the past five years. Alvarado has pledged to 
reduce the annual deficit by half over four years through a 
combination of expenditure cuts and tax changes. His 
efforts could be aided by stronger economic growth. The 
Economist Intelligence Unit expects Costa Rica’s economy 
to grow by 3.7% in 2018 and 3.8% in 2019, fueled by 
strong domestic consumption and increased international 
demand for Costa Rican exports. 

U.S.-Costa Rican Relations 
U.S. policy in Costa Rica is guided by the U.S. Strategy for 
Engagement in Central America, which is intended to 
enhance security, promote good governance, and foster 
economic integration and prosperity in the region. In April 
2018, the U.S. State Department congratulated President 
Alvarado on his election and asserted that the United States 
looks forward to building on its “long and enduring 
partnership with Costa Rica.” Commercial and security ties 
are likely to remain close, but Alvarado could face some 
domestic pressure to limit cooperation with the Trump 
Administration given that 75% of Costa Ricans disapproved 
of President Trump in 2017, according to Gallup. 

Trade and Investment Ties 
The United States and Costa Rica were among the seven 
countries that signed the Dominican Republic-Central 
America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-
DR) in 2004. The agreement did not enter into force for 
Costa Rica until January 2009, however, due to significant 
domestic opposition. CAFTA-DR has eliminated tariffs on 
consumer and industrial goods and is scheduled to phase 
out tariffs on most agricultural products by 2020.  

Total trade in goods between the United States and Costa 
Rica more than doubled between 2008 and 2012 to reach a 
peak of $19.3 billion. Bilateral trade has declined 44% over 
the past five years, however, falling to $10.8 billion in 
2017. The recent decline is largely attributable to a steep 
drop in U.S. imports resulting from Intel’s 2014 decision to 
close a microprocessor manufacturing plant in Costa Rica. 
In 2017, U.S. exports to Costa Rica amounted to $6.2 
billion and U.S. imports from Costa Rica amounted to $4.6 
billion. The U.S. had annual trade deficits with Costa Rica 
from 2009 to 2014 but has run surpluses since 2015. Top 
U.S. exports to Costa Rica in 2017 included refined oil 
products, electric machinery and parts, heavy machinery, 
medical instruments and equipment, and plastics. Top U.S. 
imports from Costa Rica included medical instruments and 
equipment, fruit, electric machinery and parts, and coffee. 
The United States is Costa Rica’s largest trading partner, 
accounting for 40% of the country’s total trade in 2017.  

CAFTA-DR includes a chapter on investment that is similar 
to a bilateral investment treaty. Nevertheless, the 
accumulated stock of U.S. foreign direct investment in 
Costa Rica has declined by 35% since CAFTA-DR entered 
into force, falling from $2.4 billion in 2008 to $1.6 billion 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

in 2016. According to the U.S. State Department, Costa 
Rica’s investment climate has been generally favorable but 
is threatened by the country’s high fiscal deficit, complex 
bureaucracy, and insufficient infrastructure. 

Security Cooperation 
Although Costa Rica’s institutions have proven more 
resilient than those of its Central American neighbors, the 
country has experienced a significant increase in organized 
crime and related violence. Government statistics indicate 
that homicides have increased by 47% over the past four 
years, rising from 411 in 2013 to 603 in 2017 (a homicide 
rate of 12 per 100,000 residents). Costa Rican authorities 
have linked much of the violence to drug trafficking 
organizations, which have sought to use the country as a 
transit and storage point for South American cocaine 
destined for the U.S. market. According to the State 
Department, the Costa Rican government increased its 
security budget by 11% and hired 1,500 new police officers 
in 2017 in an effort to address those challenges. President 
Alvarado has pledged to expand crime prevention efforts, 
invest in security technology, strengthen interagency 
cooperation, and tighten gun control measures. 

Costa Rica has had a counternarcotics cooperation 
agreement with the United States since 1999, which allows 
the U.S. Coast Guard, working with Costa Rican officials, 
to carry out drug interdiction measures in Costa Rican 
waters. These operations are a frequent subject of debate in 
Costa Rica’s Legislative Assembly, which must vote every 
six months on whether to grant permission to U.S. vessels 
to dock, refuel, and resupply in Costa Rican territory. Many 
Costa Ricans are sensitive about the presence of foreign 
military personnel in the country, since Costa Rica 
abolished its standing military in 1949. Although some 
legislators have sought to prevent U.S. vessels from 
docking in Costa Rica, the Legislative Assembly has voted 
repeatedly to provide the necessary authorizations.  

The United States also has sought to support Costa Rica’s 
domestic security efforts. In 2016, for example, the U.S. 
government announced it would provide Costa Rica with a 
wide range of equipment, including several ships, aircraft, 
and armored vehicles, as well as training and maintenance 
support. The United States also trains Costa Rican police, 
prosecutors, and judges; supports a judicial wiretap 
intercept program; and provides educational and vocational 
opportunities for at-risk youth. Many of these efforts are 
funded through a foreign assistance program known as the 
Central America Regional Security Initiative (CARSI). In 
the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2018 (P.L. 115-141), 
Congress appropriated $319 million for CARSI, including 
at least $25 million for Costa Rica. Congress also 
appropriated $5.7 million in bilateral security aid for Costa 
Rica. The Trump Administration has requested $400,000 in 
bilateral security assistance for Costa Rica and $253 million 
for CARSI in FY2019.  

Peter J. Meyer, Specialist in Latin American Affairs   

IF10908

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 
Costa Rica: An Overview 

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10908 · VERSION 2 · NEW 

 
 
 
 
