Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 
In Brief 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern Affairs 

Updated December 5, 2019 

Congressional Research Service 

7-....

www.crs.gov 

R45122 

 
 
  
 
 
SUMMARY 

R45122 

December 5, 2019 

Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 
In Brief 

Afghanistan was elevated as a significant U.S. foreign policy concern in 2001, when the United 
States, in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, led a military campaign against 
Al Qaeda and the Taliban government that harbored and supported it. In the intervening 18 years, 
the United States has suffered around 2,400 military fatalities in Afghanistan (including 17 in 
combat in 2019 to date) and Congress has appropriated approximately $133 billion for 
reconstruction there. In that time, an elected Afghan government has replaced the Taliban, and 
most measures of human development have improved, although future prospects of those 
measures remain mixed in light of a robust Taliban insurgency and continued terrorist activity. 
The fundamental objective of U.S. efforts in Afghanistan is “preventing any further attacks on the United States by terrorists 
enjoying safe haven or support in Afghanistan.” 

For a copy of the full report, 
please call 7-.... or visit 
www.crs.gov. 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern 
Affairs 
-redacted-@crs.loc.gov 

Until September 2019, U.S. military engagement in Afghanistan appeared closer to an end than perhaps ever before, as U.S. 
officials negotiated directly with Taliban interlocutors on the issues of counterterrorism and the presence of some 14,000 U.S. 
troops. However, on September 7, 2019, President Trump announced that those talks, led by U.S. envoy Zalmay Khalilzad, 
had been called off. On November 28, 2019, President Trump made a surprise visit to Afghanistan, where he apparently 
confirmed reports that unofficial talks had been restarted and claimed that the Taliban “want to do a ceasefire,” prompting 
expressions of confusion by some Afghan government officials and denials from Taliban spokesmen. In early December 
2019, the State Department announced that Khalilzad would rejoin talks with the Taliban in Doha, though analysts debate 
whether the President’s focus on a ceasefire represents a real change in the U.S. negotiating position. Afghan government 
representatives have not been directly involved in U.S.-Taliban talks, leading some to worry that the United States would 
prioritize a military withdrawal over a complex political settlement that preserves some of the social, political, and 
humanitarian gains made since 2001. Observers speculate about what kind of political arrangement, if any, could satisfy both 
Kabul and the Taliban to the extent that the latter fully abandons armed struggle. 

At the same time, President Trump has expressed his intention to withdraw U.S. forces from Afghanistan. The U.S. 
commander in Afghanistan stated in October 2019 that the United States has gradually been reducing the number of U.S. 
troops in the country in 2019 and the Pentagon has reportedly drawn up contingency plans to execute a withdrawal of all U.S. 
forces in the event President Trump makes such an order. Many observers assess that a full-scale U.S. withdrawal would lead 
to the collapse of the Afghan government and perhaps even the reestablishment of Taliban control. By many measures, the 
Taliban are in a stronger military position now than at any point since 2001, though some once-public metrics related to the 
conduct of the war have been classified or are no longer produced (including district-level territorial and population control 
assessments). Underlying the negotiations is the unsettled state of Afghan politics, which is a major complicating factor: 
preliminary results from the presidential election, which took place on September 28, 2019, have still not yet been released, 
and low turnout, allegations of fraud, and multiple candidates’ claims of victory could presage contention and instability. 

For additional information on Afghanistan and U.S. policy there, see CRS Report R45818, Afghanistan: Background and 
U.S. Policy, by Clayton Thomas. For background information and analysis on the history of congressional engagement with 
Afghanistan and U.S. policy there, as well as a summary of recent Afghanistan-related legislative proposals, see CRS Report 
R45329, Afghanistan: Issues for Congress and Legislation 2017-2019, by Clayton Thomas. 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Contents 

Overview ................................................................................................................................... 1 
U.S.-Taliban Negotiations ......................................................................................................... 2 
December 2019: Talks Officially Resumed ........................................................................ 3 
Afghan Political Situation ......................................................................................................... 5 
Military and Security Situation ................................................................................................. 5 
U.S. Military Presence and Operations ............................................................................... 6 
U.S. Adversaries: The Taliban and Islamic State ................................................................ 8 
ANDSF Development and Deployment ............................................................................. 9 
Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors ................................................................. 9 
Economy and U.S. Aid ............................................................................................................. 11 
Outlook .................................................................................................................................... 12 

Figures 

Figure 1. Insurgent Activity in Afghanistan by District .................................................................. 6 
Figure 2. Number of Weapons Released (Manned & Remotely Piloted Aircraft strike 

assets) by month, January 2013-October 2019 ............................................................................ 7 

Contacts 

Author Contact Information .......................................................................................................... 14 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
  
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Overview 

The U.S. and Afghan governments, along with partner countries, remain engaged in combat with 
a robust Taliban-led insurgency. While U.S. military officials maintain that Afghan forces are 
making progress against the Taliban,1 by some measures insurgents are in control of or contesting 
more territory today than at any point since 2001.2 The conflict also involves an array of other 
armed groups, including active affiliates of both Al Qaeda (AQ) and the Islamic State (IS, also 
known as ISIS, ISIL, or by the Arabic acronym Da’esh). Since early 2015, the NATO-led mission 
in Afghanistan, known as Resolute Support Mission (RSM), has focused on training, advising, 
and assisting Afghan government forces; combat operations by U.S. forces, along with some 
partner forces, also continue.  

In recent months, President Donald J. Trump has expressed his desire to withdraw U.S. forces 
from Afghanistan, saying in August 2019 that he wants to do so “as quickly as we can.”3 The U.S. 
commander in Afghanistan stated in October 2019 that the United States has gradually been 
reducing the number of troops in the country in 2019, and the Pentagon reportedly maintains 
contingency plans to execute a withdrawal of all U.S. forces should the President decide to issue 
such an order.4  

Alongside the military campaign, the United States has been engaged in a diplomatic effort to end 
the war through direct talks with Taliban representatives—a reversal of previous U.S. policy. A 
draft framework, in which the Taliban would agree to prohibit terrorist groups from operating on 
Afghan soil in return for the eventual withdrawal of U.S. forces, was reached between U.S. and 
Taliban negotiators in January 2019, and talks appeared close to concluding in the early fall. 
However, on September 7, 2019, President Trump announced that those talks had been called off.  

Afghan government representatives were not directly involved in U.S.-Taliban talks, leading 
some Afghans to worry that the United States would prioritize a military withdrawal over a 
complex political settlement that preserves some of the social, political, and humanitarian gains 
made since 2001.5 During a November 28, 2019 surprise visit to Afghanistan, President Trump 
appeared to confirm reports that informal U.S.-Taliban meetings are again taking place, and about 
a week later the State Department announced that Khalilzad would rejoin talks with the Taliban in 
Doha, Qatar. However, President Trump’s remarks about the necessity of a ceasefire have sparked 
some expressions of confusion.6  

Further complicating U.S. policy is the unsettled state of Afghan politics: the release of 
preliminary results from the critical presidential election, which took place on September 28, 
2019, was expected within weeks but is now, as of December 2019, delayed indefinitely as a 
partial recount takes place. The election was characterized by low turnout, allegations of fraud, 

1 U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), Remarks by Secretary Esper in a Joint Press Conference With Senior Afghan 
Officials and Resolute Support Mission Commander, October 21, 2019.  
2 Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (SIGAR), Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, 
January 30, 2019. 
3 “Trump Wants to Get Out Of Afghanistan ‘As Quickly As He Can,’” Tolo News, August 1, 2019. 
4 Carol Lee and Courtney Kube, “Pentagon Draws up Plans for Quick Afghanistan Withdrawal in Case Trump 
Blindsides Military,” NBC News, October 21, 2019. 
5 See, for example, Mushtaq Mojaddidi, “Young Afghans Wary as Possible US-Taliban Deal Nears,” Agence France 
Presse, August 3, 2019.  
6 Mujib Mashal, “In Afghanistan, Trump Creates Confusion Over U.S. Policy on Taliban,” New York Times, November 
29, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

1 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

and multiple candidates’ claims of victory. The Afghan government has made some progress in 
reducing corruption and implementing its budgetary commitments,7 but faces domestic criticism 
for its failure to guarantee security and prevent insurgent gains. 

The United States has spent approximately $133 billion in various forms of reconstruction aid to 
Afghanistan over the past 18 years, from building up and sustaining the Afghan National Defense 
and Security Forces (ANDSF) to economic development. This assistance has increased Afghan 
government capacity, but prospects for stability in Afghanistan appear distant. Some U.S. 
policymakers still hope that Afghanistan’s largely underdeveloped natural resources and/or 
geographic position at the crossroads of future global trade routes might improve the economic 
life of the country, and, by extension, its social and political dynamics. Nevertheless, 
Afghanistan’s economic and political outlook remains uncertain, if not negative, in light of 
ongoing hostilities.  

U.S.-Taliban Negotiations 

In August 2017, President Trump announced what he termed a new strategy for Afghanistan and 
South Asia in a nationally televised address.8 Many Afghan and U.S. observers interpreted the 
speech and the policies it promised (expanded targeting authorities for U.S. forces, greater 
pressure on Pakistan, a modest increase in the number of U.S. and international troops) as a sign 
of renewed U.S. commitment to Afghanistan.9 Less than a year later, in July 2018, the Trump 
Administration reportedly ordered the start of direct talks with the Taliban that did not include the 
Afghan government. This development represented a reversal of U.S. policy, which had 
previously been to support an “Afghan-led, Afghan-owned” peace process.10  

In September 2018, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo appointed former U.S. Ambassador to 
Afghanistan Zalmay Khalilzad to the newly created post of Special Representative for 
Afghanistan Reconciliation.11 For almost a year, Khalilzad held a near-continuous series of 
meetings with Taliban representatives in Doha, Qatar, along with consultations with the Afghan, 
Pakistani, and other regional governments. In March 2019, Khalilzad announced that an 
agreement “in draft” had been reached on counterterrorism assurances and U.S. troop withdrawal. 
He asserted that after the agreement was finalized, “the Taliban and other Afghans, including the 
government, will begin intra-Afghan negotiations on a political settlement and comprehensive 
ceasefire.”12  

By August 2019, the process appeared to be reaching its conclusion, with multiple news reports 
detailing the outlines of an emerging U.S.-Taliban arrangement.13 In a September 2, 2019, 

7 See, for example, United Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan, Afghanistan’s Fight Against Corruption: 
Groundwork for Peace and Prosperity, May 2019.  
8 The White House, Remarks by President Trump on the Strategy in Afghanistan and South Asia, August 21, 2017. 
9 Pamela Constable, “In Afghanistan, Trump’s Speech Brings Relief to Some. To Others, ‘It Means More War, 
Destruction,’” Washington Post, August 22, 2017.  
10 Mujib Mashal and Eric Schmitt, “White House Orders Direct Taliban Talks to Jump-Start Afghan Negotiations,” 
New York Times, July 15, 2018.  
11 Khalilzad served as Ambassador to Afghanistan (2003-2005), Ambassador to Iraq (2005-2007), and U.S. Permanent 
Representative to the United Nations (2007-2009) during the George W. Bush Administration. 
12 U.S. Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, Twitter, March 12, 2019, at https://twitter.com/US4AfghanPeace/
status/1105513781705302016. 
13 Dan Lamothe, John Hudson, and Pamela Constable, “U.S. preparing to withdraw thousands of troops from 
Afghanistan in initial deal with Taliban,” Washington Post, August 1, 2019.  

Congressional Research Service  

2 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

interview with Afghanistan’s TOLO News, Khalilzad confirmed, “we have reached an agreement 
in principle” in which the United States would withdraw about 5,000 troops from five bases 
within 135 days if the Taliban reduced violence in two key provinces (Kabul and Parwan). The 
remainder of the U.S. troops would be withdrawn from Afghanistan within 16 months, or by the 
end of 2020, arguably fulfilling a key Taliban demand for the removal of foreign forces. It was 
less clear what specific concessions the Taliban would make in return. As part of the tentative 
deal, U.S. officials reportedly “expected” the Taliban to enter direct negotiations with the Afghan 
government after a U.S. withdrawal begins.14 

That process came to an abrupt halt on September 7, when President Trump revealed in a series of 
tweets that he had invited “major Taliban leaders” and Afghan President Ashraf Ghani to meet 
with him separately at Camp David on the following day. He wrote that, because a Taliban attack 
had killed several people, including a U.S. soldier, in Kabul on September 5, he had “immediately 
cancelled the meeting and called off peace negotiations.”15 Some questioned why the September 5 
attack prompted President Trump to cancel the negotiations; 17 U.S. troops had been killed in 
combat in 2019 before that, and the Taliban conducted multiple large-scale bombings of civilian 
targets during the talks in Doha (alongside their ongoing military campaign against Afghan 
forces). Other potential factors motivating the cancelation included negative reactions to the 
prospective deal from some Members of Congress.16  

December 2019: Talks Officially Resumed 

Taliban officials responded to President Trump’s decision by warning that the United States 
would “regret” abandoning talks while maintaining that “our doors are open for negotiations.”17 
Within a month, news reports indicated that unofficial talks between Khalilzad and Taliban 
representatives in Pakistan had begun.18 Momentum toward reopening talks was strengthened by 
the President Ghani’s announcement on November 12 of the planned release of three high-profile 
Taliban prisoners from Afghan government custody in exchange for an American and Australian 
held by the Haqqani Network (a U.S.-designated terrorist organization and semi-autonomous 
component of the Taliban). Despite several delays, the prisoner exchange went through about a 
week later.19 

On November 28, 2019, President Trump made a surprise Thanksgiving visit to Afghanistan. 
During the trip, President Trump both expressed ambivalence about a potential “deal” with the 
Taliban (“If they make it, fine. If they don’t make it, that’s fine”) and argued that the Taliban 
“want to make a deal very badly.”20 In response, a Taliban spokesman said, “The Americans 

14 Karen DeYoung, Missy Ryan, Anne Gearan, and Philip Rucker, “Trump and senior aides discuss withdrawal from 
Afghanistan as talks with Taliban advance,” Washington Post, August 16, 2019. 
15 Donald J. Trump, Twitter, September 7, 2019, at https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/
1170469618177236992. 
16 Lindsey Graham and Jack Keane, “We Can’t Outsource Our Security to Anyone—Especially the Taliban,” 
Washington Post, opinion, August 28, 2019. 
17 “Afghanistan war: Taliban tell Trump their ‘doors are open,’” BBC, September 18, 2019. 
18 Asif Shahzad and Jonathan Landy, “U.S. Afghanistan envoy meets Taliban in Pakistan: sources,” Reuters, October 4, 
2019; Jessica Donati, “U.S. Moves to Restart Taliban Peace Process,” Wall Street Journal, October 13, 2019. 
19 The three Taliban prisoners, who were flown to Doha, include Anas Haqqani, the younger brother of Haqqani 
Network leader Sirajuddin Haqqani, who is the deputy leader of the Taliban overseeing military operations. 
20 The White House, “Remarks by President Trump and President Ghani of Afghanistan After Bilateral Meeting, 
Bagram, Afghanistan,” November 28, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

3 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

walked away from the negotiating table, and now the ball is on their side – it is up to them to 
come back if they want to solve this…Our positions remain the same.”21  

More substantively, President Trump stated that “we’re meeting with them [the Taliban], and 
we’re saying it has to be a ceasefire. They didn’t want to do a ceasefire, but now they do want to 
do a ceasefire, I believe.” While the Afghan government has also sought to precondition talks on 
a broad ceasefire, some analysts argue that doing so could forestall talks entirely given the 
Taliban’s relatively strong military position and President Trump’s publicly stated desire for a 
U.S. withdrawal.22 On December 4, the State Department released a statement announcing 
Khalilzad’s departure for Kabul, followed by travel to Doha to “rejoin talks with the Taliban to 
discuss steps that could lead to intra-Afghan negotiations and a peaceful settlement of the war, 
specifically a reduction in violence that leads to a ceasefire.”23 

It remains unclear what kind of political arrangement could satisfy both Kabul and the Taliban to 
the extent that the latter abandons its armed struggle. Afghan President Ghani has promised that 
his government will not accept any settlement that limits Afghans’ rights. In a January 2019 
televised address, he further warned that any agreement to withdraw U.S. forces that did not 
include Kabul’s participation could lead to “catastrophe,” pointing to the 1990s-era civil strife 
following the fall of the Soviet-backed government that led to the rise of the Taliban.24 Afghans 
opposed to the Taliban doubt the group’s trustworthiness, and express concern that, in the absence 
of U.S. military pressure, the group will have little incentive to comply with the terms of an 
agreement, the most crucial aspect of which would arguably be concluding a comprehensive 
political settlement with the Afghan government.25 The Taliban have given contradictory signs, 
and generally do not describe in detail their vision for post-settlement Afghan governance beyond 
referring to it as a subject for intra-Afghan negotiations.”26 While many Afghans, especially 
women, who remember Taliban rule and oppose the group’s policies and beliefs remain wary,27 a 
December 2019 survey reported that a “significant majority” of Afghans are both aware of (77%) 
and strongly or somewhat support (89%) efforts to negotiate a peace agreement with the 
Taliban.28  

21 Mashal, “In Afghanistan, Trump Creates Confusion Over U.S. Policy on Taliban,” op. cit. 
22 Wesley Morgan, “How Trump trips up his own Afghan peace efforts,” Politico, August 16, 2019; Karen DeYoung 
and Susannah George, “Trump’s talk of Afghanistan cease-fire appears to surprise the Taliban, Afghan government,” 
Washington Post, November 29, 2019. 
23 Office of the Spokesperson, “Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation Zalmay Khalilzad Travels to 
Afghanistan and Qatar,” December 4, 2019. 
24 Hasib Danish Alikozai and Mohammad Habibzada, “Afghans Worry as US Makes Progress in Taliban Talks,” Voice 
of America, January 29, 2019. 
25 Pamela Constable, “Afghans voice fears that the U.S. is undercutting them in deal with the Taliban,” Washington 
Post, August 17, 2019. 
26 Middle East Media Research Institute, “Afghan Taliban Spokesman Suhail Shaheen On Failed U.S.-Taliban Talks,” 
September 19, 2019. One spokesman said in January 2019 that the group is “not seeking a monopoly on power;” 
another in May spoke of the group’s “determination to reestablish the Islamic Emirate in Afghanistan.” Kathy Gannon, 
“Taliban Say They Are Not Looking to Rule Afghanistan Alone,” Associated Press, January 30, 2019; Abdul Qadir 
Sediqi and Rupman Jain, “Taliban Fighters Double as Reporters to Wage Afghan Digital War,” Reuters, May 10, 2019. 
27 Pamela Constable, “The Return of a Taliban Government? Afghanistan Talks Raise Once-Unthinkable Question,” 
Washington Post, January 29, 2019. 
28 The Asia Foundation, “Afghanistan in 2019: A Survey of the Afghan People,” released December 3, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

4 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Afghan Political Situation 

The unsettled state of Afghan politics is a major complicating factor for potential negotiations. 
Afghanistan’s October 2018 parliamentary elections were marred by logistical, administrative, 
and security problems; the new parliament was inaugurated in April 2019, but the lower house 
quickly fell into a months-long dispute, including physical confrontation among parliamentarians, 
over the election of a speaker.29 A presidential election, originally scheduled for April 2019, was 
held after two delays on September 28, 2019. The election went forward despite widespread 
expectations that it would again be delayed to facilitate the formation of an interim national unity 
government (leading most candidates to forgo campaigning) and despite concerns about the 
potentially destabilizing effect of election-related violence or an outcome seen as illegitimate.30 

The release of the presidential vote results has been delayed several times and they remain 
unknown. The IEC has validated 1.8 million votes, putting turnout at about 20% of Afghanistan’s 
9 million registered voters (out of a total population of around 35 million).31 The campaigns of 
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah Abdullah, the two frontrunners, both 
claimed victory within days of the vote, without presenting concrete evidence. This has led to 
fears of a repeat of the circumstances surrounding the 2014 presidential election, which prompted 
a dispute between the same two candidates that nearly led to violence and required intensive U.S. 
diplomacy to broker a fragile power-sharing agreement that largely held through 2019.32  

As of December 2019, the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) is conducting a partial vote 
recount to address candidate concerns.33 That recount has been held up in at least several 
provinces by Abdullah supporters who allege fraud. In the event that no candidate achieves a 
majority, the Afghan constitution requires a runoff vote between the two top candidates (as 
happened in 2014 between Ghani and Abdullah). However, harsh weather conditions make large 
parts of the country inaccessible during winter, perhaps necessitating a delay until spring 2020 
that would extend political uncertainty and complicate potential negotiations.  

Military and Security Situation  

Since early 2015, the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan of 16,700 troops, known as Resolute 
Support Mission (RSM), has focused on training, advising, and assisting Afghan government 
forces. Combat operations by U.S. forces also continue and have increased in number since 2017. 
These two “complementary missions” comprise Operation Freedom’s Sentinel.34  

29 Mujib Mashal and Jawad Sukhanyar, “Long, Rowdy Feud in Afghan Parliament Mirrors Wider Political Fragility,” 
New York Times, June 19, 2019. 
30 Cara Anna and Tameem Akhgar, “Afghanistan Election in Doubt as US, Taliban Near Deal,” Associated Press, 
August 9, 2019; Pamela Constable, “With U.S.-Taliban peace talks canceled, Afghan president is on the hot seat,” 
Washington Post, September 9, 2019. 
31 Ali Yawar Adili and Jelena Bjelica, “Afghanistan’s 2019 Election (23): Disputed biometric votes endanger election 
results,” Afghanistan Analysts Network, November 7, 2019. 
32 Abdul Qadir Sediqi and Rod Nickel “Front-runners each claim victory in Afghan election,” Reuters, September 30, 
2019. 
33 Zahra Rahimi, “IEC: Election Announcement Postponed Again,” Tolo News, November 13, 2019. 
34 Lead Inspector General for Overseas Contingency Operations, Operation Freedom’s Sentinel, Quarterly Report to 
Congress, July 1 to September 30, 2018, November 19, 2018. 

Congressional Research Service  

5 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Since at least early 2017, U.S. military officials have publicly stated that the conflict is “largely 
stalemated.”35 Arguably complicating that assessment, the U.S. government is withholding many 
once-public metrics of military progress. Most notably, the U.S. military is “no longer producing 
its district-level stability assessments of Afghan government and insurgent control and 
influence.”36 This information, which was in every previous Special Inspector General for 
Afghanistan Reconstruction (SIGAR) quarterly report going back to January 2016, estimated the 
extent of Taliban control and influence in terms of both territory and population, and was 
accompanied by charts portraying those trends over time along with a color-coded map of 
control/influence by district (see Figure 1). SIGAR reports that it was told by the U.S. military 
that the assessment is no longer being produced because it “was of limited decision-making value 
to the [U.S.] Commander.”37 

Figure 1. Insurgent Activity in Afghanistan by District 

Source: SIGAR, January 20, 2019, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress. 

The last reported metrics from SIGAR in its January 30, 2019, report, illustrated that the share of 
districts under government control or influence fell to 53.8%, as of October 2018. This figure, 
which marked a slight decline from previous reports, was the lowest recorded by SIGAR since 
tracking began in November 2015; 12% of districts were under insurgent control or influence, 
with the remaining 34% contested.38  

U.S. Military Presence and Operations 

On multiple occasions, President Trump has publicly declared his frustration with how long U.S. 
forces have been in Afghanistan and his intention to withdraw them from the country. General 

35 Ellen Mitchell, “Afghanistan War at a Stalemate, Top General Tells Lawmakers,” The Hill, December 4, 2018. 
36 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2019. 
37 Ibid. 
38 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, October 30, 2018.  

Congressional Research Service  

6 

 
 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Austin S. Miller, the top U.S. commander in Afghanistan, said on October 9, 2019 that the 
number of U.S. forces had been gradually reduced by 2,000 over the past year, to between 12,000 
and 13,000.39 Secretary of Defense Mark Esper said in December 2019 that he was “confident 
that we could reduce our numbers in Afghanistan and still ensure that place doesn’t become a safe 
haven for terrorists who could attack the United States.”40 The Pentagon reportedly has drawn up 
plans to execute a rapid withdrawal from the country in the event the President makes a 
withdrawal order. One defense official cited the October 2019 withdrawal of U.S. troops from 
Syria as a potential “dress rehearsal” for U.S. policy in Afghanistan.41 

Figure 2. Number of Weapons Released (Manned & Remotely Piloted Aircraft strike 
assets) by month, January 2013-October 2019 

Source: Combined Forces Air Component Commander 2013-2019 Airpower Statistics. 

At the same time, U.S. air operations have escalated considerably under the Trump 
Administration, as measured by the number of munitions released (see Figure 2). These 
operations have reportedly contributed to a sharp rise in civilian casualties; the U.N. reported that 
the third quarter of 2019 saw the highest quarterly civilian casualty toll since tracking began in 
2009, with over 4,300 civilians killed or injured from July 1 to September 30.42 Though the 
majority of civilian casualties are attributed to anti-government forces, the U.N. reported in 
October that civilian casualties from air operations (885 killed or injured) set a record in the first 
nine months of 2019, with 74% of those casualties resulting from operations by international 
forces. In September 2019, U.S. forces conducted strikes in 29 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces.43 

39 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Mujib Mashal, “U.S. Is Quietly Reducing Its Troop Force in Afghanistan,” New York 
Times, October 21, 2019. 
40 Phil Stewart, “Exclusive: U.S. troop drawdowns in Afghanistan ‘not necessarily’ tied to Taliban deal – Esper,” 
Reuters, December 2, 2019. 
41 Lee and Kube, op. cit. 
42 United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Quarterly Report on the Protection of Civilians in 
Armed Conflict, October 17, 2019. 
43 U.S. Forces-Afghanistan, September 2019 Strike Summary, October 27, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

7 

 
 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

U.S. Adversaries: The Taliban and Islamic State 

The leader of the Taliban is Haibatullah Akhundzada, who is known as emir al-mu’minin, or 
commander of the faithful; the Taliban style themselves as the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. 
Haibatullah succeeded Mullah Mansoor, who was killed in a 2016 U.S. airstrike in Pakistan; 
Mansoor had succeeded Taliban founder Mullah Omar, who died in hiding of natural causes in 
April 2013. Formerly a figure in Taliban religious courts, Haibatullah is generally regarded as 
“more of an Islamic scholar than a military tactician.”44 Still, under his leadership the Taliban 
have achieved some notable military successes and the group is seen as more cohesive and less 
susceptible to fragmentation than in the past.45 There are an estimated 60,000 full-time Taliban 
fighters. 

The Taliban retain the ability to conduct high-profile urban attacks while also demonstrating 
considerable tactical capabilities; SIGAR reported in October 2019 that “enemy attacks have been 
more effective” in the third quarter of 2019 compared to both earlier in the year and the same 
period in 2018.46 Reports indicate that ANDSF fatalities have averaged 30-40 a day in recent 
months, and President Ghani stated in January 2019 that over 45,000 security personnel had paid 
“the ultimate sacrifice” since he took office in September 2014.47 Insider attacks on U.S. and 
coalition forces by Afghan nationals are a sporadic, but persistent, problem.  

Beyond the Taliban, a significant share of U.S. operations have been aimed at the local Islamic 
State affiliate, known as Islamic State-Khorasan Province (ISKP, also known as ISIS-K). 
Estimates of ISKP strength generally ranged from 2,000 to 4,000 fighters until ISKP “collapsed” 
in late 2019 due to offensives by U.S. and Afghan forces and, separately, the Taliban.48 Special 
Representative Khalilzad recognized the Taliban’s role in progress against ISKP, while warning 
that ISKP “hasn’t been eliminated.”49 ISKP and Taliban forces have sometimes fought over 
control of territory or because of political or other differences.50 Some U.S. officials have stated 
that ISKP aspires to conduct attacks in the west, though there is reportedly disagreement within 
the U.S. government about the nature of the threat.51 ISKP also has claimed responsibility for a 
number of large-scale attacks, many targeting Afghanistan’s Shia minority. Some raise the 
prospect of Taliban hardliners defecting to ISKP in the event that Taliban leaders agree to a 
political settlement or to a continued U.S. counterterrorism presence.52 While Al Qaeda’s 
presence in the country is diminished, the UN reports that Al Qaeda views Afghanistan as a 

44 Matthew Dupee, “Red on Red: Analyzing Afghanistan’s Intra-Insurgency Violence,” CTC Sentinel, vol. 11, iss. 1, 
January 2018. 
45 Andrew Watkins, “Taliban Fragmentation: A Figment of Your Imagination?” War on the Rocks, September 4, 2019. 
46 See also Alec Worsnop, From Guerilla to Maneuver Warfare: A Look at the Taliban’s Growing Combat Capability, 
Modern War Institute, June 6, 2018.  
47 “Afghanistan’s Ghani says 45,000 Security Personnel Killed Since 2014,” BBC, January 25, 2019.  
48 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Mujib Mashal, “ISIS Is Losing Afghan Territory. That Means Little for Its Victims,” New 
York Times, December 2, 2019. 
49 U.S. Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, Twitter, December 3, 2019, at 
https://twitter.com/US4AfghanPeace/status/1201956898616025093. 
50 See, for example, Amira Jadoon et al., “Challenging the ISK Brand in Afghanistan-Pakistan: Rivalries and Divided 
Loyalties,” CTC Sentinel, vol. 11, iss. 4, April 26, 2018; Najim Rahim and Rod Nordland, “Taliban Surge Routs ISIS 
in Northern Afghanistan,” New York Times, August 1 2018. 
51 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Julian Barnes, “U.S. Military Calls ISIS in Afghanistan a Threat to the West. Intelligence 
Officials Disagree,” New York Times, August 2, 2019. 
52 David Ignatius, “Uncertainty Clouds the Path Forward in Afghanistan.” Washington Post, July 22, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

8 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

“continuing safe haven for its leadership, relying on its long-standing and strong relationship with 
the Taliban leadership.”53 

ANDSF Development and Deployment  

The effectiveness of the ANDSF is key to the security of Afghanistan. Congress appropriated at 
least $82.5 billion for Afghan security assistance between FY2002 and FY2019, according to 
SIGAR.54 Since 2014, the United States generally has provided around 75% of the estimated $5-6 
billion a year to fund the ANDSF, with the balance coming from U.S. partners ($1 billion 
annually) and the Afghan government ($500 million). 

Concerns about the ANDSF raised by SIGAR, the Department of Defense, and others include  

 

absenteeism, the fact that about 35% of the force does not reenlist each year, and 
the potential for rapid recruitment to dilute the force’s quality; 

  widespread illiteracy within the force;  
 

credible allegations of child sexual abuse and other potential human rights 
abuses;55 and 
casualty rates often described as unsustainable. 

 

Total ANDSF strength was reported at about 254,000 as of July 2019, down 18,000 from the 
previous quarter. The U.S. military attributed the decrease to changes in enrollment verification 
processes and says that the decrease “do[es] not directly translate to a change in actual … strength 
of the ANDSF.”56 Other metrics related to ANDSF performance, including casualty and attrition 
rates, have been classified by U.S. Forces-Afghanistan (USFOR-A) starting with the October 
2017 SIGAR quarterly report, citing a request from the Afghan government, although SIGAR had 
previously published those metrics as part of its quarterly reports.57 In both legislation and public 
statements, some Members of Congress have expressed concern over the decline in the types and 
amount of information made public by the executive branch.  

Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors 

Regional dynamics, and the involvement of outside powers, are central to the conflict in 
Afghanistan. The neighboring state widely considered most important in this regard is Pakistan, 
which has played an active, and by many accounts negative, role in Afghan affairs for decades. 
Pakistan’s security services maintain ties to Afghan insurgent groups, most notably the Haqqani 
Network.58 Afghan leaders, along with U.S. military commanders, attribute much of the 
insurgency’s power and longevity either directly or indirectly to Pakistani support; President 
Trump has accused Pakistan of “housing the very terrorists that we are fighting.”59 U.S. officials 

53 Twenty-fourth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 
2368 (2017) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and Associated Individuals and Entities, S/2019/570, July 15, 2019. 
54 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, October 30, 2019. 
55 See SIGAR Report 17-47, Child Sexual Assault in Afghanistan: Implementation of the Leahy Laws and Reports of 
Assault by Afghan Security Forces, June 2017 (released on January 23, 2018). 
56 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, October 30, 2019. 
57 Shawn Snow, “Report: US Officials Classify Crucial Metrics on Afghan Casualties, Readiness,” Military Times, 
October 30, 2017. 
58 For more, see CRS In Focus IF10604, Al Qaeda and Islamic State Affiliates in Afghanistan, by Clayton Thomas.  
59 White House Office of the Press Secretary, Remarks by President Trump on the Strategy in Afghanistan and South 

Congressional Research Service  

9 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

have long identified militant safe havens in Pakistan as a threat to security in Afghanistan, though 
some Pakistani officials dispute that charge and note the Taliban’s increased territorial control 
within Afghanistan itself.60 

Pakistan may view a weak and destabilized Afghanistan as preferable to a strong, unified Afghan 
state (particularly one led by an ethnic Pashtun-dominated government in Kabul; Pakistan has a 
large and restive Pashtun minority).61 However, instability in Afghanistan could rebound to 
Pakistan’s detriment; Pakistan has struggled with indigenous Islamist militants of its own. 
Afghanistan-Pakistan relations are further complicated by the presence of over a million Afghan 
refugees in Pakistan, as well a long-running and ethnically tinged dispute over their shared 1,600-
mile border.62 Pakistan’s security establishment, fearful of strategic encirclement by India, 
apparently continues to view the Afghan Taliban as a relatively friendly and reliably anti-India 
element in Afghanistan. India’s diplomatic and commercial presence in Afghanistan—and U.S. 
rhetorical support for it—exacerbates Pakistani fears of encirclement. Indian interest in 
Afghanistan stems largely from India’s broader regional rivalry with Pakistan, which impedes 
Indian efforts to establish stronger and more direct commercial and political relations with 
Central Asia. 

In his August 2017 speech, President Trump announced what he characterized as a new approach 
to Pakistan, saying, “We can no longer be silent about Pakistan’s safe havens for terrorist 
organizations, the Taliban, and other groups that pose a threat to the region and beyond.”63 He 
also, however, praised Pakistan as a “valued partner,” citing the close U.S.-Pakistani military 
relationship. In January 2018, the Trump Administration announced plans to suspend security 
assistance to Pakistan, a decision that has affected billions of dollars in aid.64  

Since late 2018, the Trump Administration has been seeking Islamabad’s assistance in facilitating 
U.S. talks with the Taliban. One important action taken by Pakistan was the October 2018 release 
of Taliban co-founder Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who was captured in Karachi in a joint U.S.-
Pakistani operation in 2010. Khalilzad, who has since met with Baradar several times in Doha, 
said in February 2019 that Baradar’s release “was my request,” and later thanked Pakistan for 
facilitating the travel of Taliban figures to talks in Doha.65 The Administration has since given 
differing accounts of Pakistan’s stance. In April 2019, the State Department reported to Congress 

Asia, August 21, 2017. 
60 Author interviews with Pakistani military officials, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, February 21, 2018. 
61 Pashtuns are an ethnic group that makes up about 40% of Afghanistan’s 35 million people and 15% of Pakistan’s 215 
million; they thus represent a plurality in Afghanistan but are a relatively small minority among many others in 
Pakistan, though Pakistan’s Pashtun population is considerably larger than Afghanistan’s. Pakistan condemns as 
interference statements by President Ashraf Ghani (who is Pashtun) and other Afghan leaders about an ongoing protest 
campaign by Pakistani Pashtuns for greater civil and political rights. Ayaz Gul, “Afghan Leader Roils Pakistan With 
Pashtun Comments,” Voice of America, February 7, 2019. 
62 About 2 million Afghan refugees have returned from Pakistan since the Taliban fell in 2011, but 1.4 million 
registered refugees remain in Pakistan, according to the United Nations, along with perhaps as many as 1 million 
unregistered refugees. Many of these refugees are Pashtuns (see Amnesty International, Afghanistan’s Refugees: Forty 
Years of Dispossession, June 20, 2019). Pakistan, the United Nations, and others recognize the Durand Line as an 
international boundary, but Afghanistan does not. 
63 White House Office of the Press Secretary, Remarks by President Trump on the Strategy in Afghanistan and South 
Asia, August 21, 2017. 
64 Mark Landler and Gardiner Harris, “Trump, Citing Pakistan as a ‘Safe Haven’ for Terrorists, Freezes Aid,” New 
York Times, January 4, 2018. Pakistan closed its ground and air lines of communication to the United States after the 
latter suspended security aid during an earlier period of U.S.-Pakistan tensions in 2011-2012. 
65 “Mullah Baradar released by Pakistan at the behest of US: Khalilzad,” The Hindu, February 9, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

10 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

that, “While Pakistan has taken some limited, reversible actions in support of the [U.S.] South 
Asia strategy … we have not seen it take the sustained, irreversible actions that would warrant 
lifting the [security aid] suspension.”66 A biannual Department of Defense report on Afghanistan 
released in July 2019 asserted that “Pakistan is actively supporting Afghan reconciliation.”67  

Afghanistan largely maintains cordial ties with its other neighbors, notably the post-Soviet states 
of Central Asia, whose role in Afghanistan has been relatively limited but could increase.68 In the 
past two years, multiple U.S. commanders have warned of increased levels of assistance, and 
perhaps even material support, for the Taliban from Russia and Iran, both of which cite IS 
presence in Afghanistan to justify their activities.69 Both nations were opposed to the Taliban 
government of the late 1990s, but reportedly see the Taliban as a useful point of leverage vis-a-vis 
the United States. Afghanistan may also represent a growing priority for China in the context of 
broader Chinese aspirations in Asia and globally.70  

President Trump mentioned neither Iran nor Russia in his August 2017 speech, and it is unclear 
how, if at all, the U.S. approach to them might have changed as part of the new strategy. 
Afghanistan may also represent a growing priority for China in the context of broader Chinese 
aspirations in Asia and globally.71 In his speech, President Trump did encourage India to play a 
greater role in Afghan economic development; this, along with other Administration messaging, 
has compounded Pakistani concerns over Indian activity in Afghanistan.72 India has been the 
largest regional contributor to Afghan reconstruction, but New Delhi has not shown an inclination 
to pursue a deeper defense relationship with Kabul.  

Economy and U.S. Aid 

Economic development is pivotal to Afghanistan’s long-term stability, though indicators of future 
growth are mixed. Decades of war have stunted the development of most domestic industries, 
including mining.73 The economy has also been hurt by a steep decrease in the amount of aid 
provided by international donors. Afghanistan’s gross domestic product (GDP) has grown an 
average of 7% per year since 2003, but growth slowed to 2% in 2013 due to aid cutbacks and 
political uncertainty about the post-2014 security situation. Since 2015, Afghanistan has 
experienced a “slight recovery” with growth of between 2% and 3% in 2016 and 2017, though the 
increase in the poverty rate (55% living below the national poverty line in 2017 compared to 38% 

66 Department of State, Report to Congress on U.S. Security Assistance to Pakistan, P.L. 116-6, April 30, 2019.  
67 DOD, Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan, July 12, 2019. 
68 Humayun Hamidzada and Richard Ponzio, Central Asia’s Growing Role in Building Peace and Regional 
Connectivity with Afghanistan, United States Institute of Peace, August 2019. 
69 In October 2018, the Trump Administration sanctioned several Iranian military officials for providing support to the 
Taliban. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury and the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center Partners Sanction 
Taliban Facilitators and their Iranian Supporters, October 23, 2018. 
70 Thomas Ruttig, Climbing on China’s Priority List: Views on Afghanistan from Beijing, Afghanistan Analysts 
Network, April 10, 2018. 
71 Ibid; Michael Martina, “Afghan Troops to Train in China, Ambassador Says,” Reuters, September 6, 2018. 
72 Author interviews with Pakistani military and political officials, Islamabad and Rawalpindi, Pakistan, February 2018. 
73 Much attention has been paid to Afghanistan’s potential mineral and hydrocarbon resources, which by some 
estimates could be considerable but have yet to be fully explored or developed. Once estimated at nearly $1 trillion, the 
value of Afghan mineral deposits has since been revised downward, but those deposits reportedly have attracted 
interest from the Trump Administration. Mark Landler and James Risen, “Trump Finds Reason for the U.S. to Remain 
in Afghanistan: Minerals,” New York Times, July 25, 2017. Additionally, Afghanistan’s geographic location could 
position it as a transit country for others’ resources.  

Congressional Research Service  

11 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

in 2012-2013) complicates that picture.74 Social conditions in Afghanistan remain equally mixed. 
On issues ranging from human trafficking to religious freedom to women’s rights, Afghanistan 
has, by some accounts, made significant progress since 2001, but future prospects in these areas 
remain uncertain.  

Congress has appropriated more than $132 billion in aid for Afghanistan since FY2002, with 
about 63% for security and 28% for development (with the remainder for civilian operations and 
humanitarian aid).75 In September 2019, the Administration announced it would withhold $160 
million in direct funding to the Afghan government for various development projects due to “the 
Afghan government’s inability to transparently manage U.S. government resources” and “failure 
to meet benchmarks for transparency and accountability in public financial management.”76 

The Administration’s FY2020 budget requests $4.8 billion for the ANDSF, $400 million in 
Economic Support Funds, and smaller amounts to help the Afghan government with other tasks 
like counternarcotics.77 This is down from both the FY2019 request, as well as the FY2018 
enacted level of about $5.5 billion in total funding for Afghanistan (down from nearly $17 billion 
in FY2010). Other than ANDSF funding and other DOD contributions, these figures are not 
included in the cost of U.S. combat operations (including related regional support activities), 
which was estimated at a total of $764.5 billion since FY2001 as of June 2019, according to the 
DOD’s Cost of War report, with approximately $45 billion requested for each of FY2018 and 
FY2019.78 In its FY2020 budget request, the Pentagon identified $18.6 billion in direct war costs 
in Afghanistan, as well as $35.3 billion in “enduring theater requirements and related missions;” it 
is unclear how much of the latter figure is for Afghanistan versus other theaters. 

Outlook 

Insurgent and terrorist groups have demonstrated considerable capabilities in 2019, throwing into 
sharp relief the daunting security challenges that the Afghan government and its U.S. and 
international partners face. At the same time, prospects for a negotiated settlement, driven by 
direct U.S.-Taliban talks, are uncertain in light of the Taliban’s continued refusal to talk to the 
Afghan government.  

U.S. policy has sought to force the Taliban to negotiate with the Afghan government by 
compelling the group to conclude that continued military struggle is futile in light of combined 
U.S., NATO, and ANDSF capabilities. It is still unclear, however, how the Taliban perceives its 
fortunes; given the group’s recent battlefield gains, one observer has said that “the group has little 
reason to commit to a peace process: it is on a winning streak.”79  

Observers differ on whether the Taliban pose an existential threat to the Afghan government, 
given the current military balance. That dynamic could change if the United States alters the level 
or nature of its troop deployments in Afghanistan or funding for the ANDSF. President Ghani has 
said, “[W]e will not be able to support our army for six months without U.S. [financial] 

74 “Afghanistan,” CIA World Factbook, last updated July 10, 2019. 
75 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January 30, 2019. 
76 U.S. Department of State, Statement on Accountability and Anti-Corruption in Afghanistan, September 19, 2019. 
77 For more, see CRS Report R45329, Afghanistan: Issues for Congress and Legislation 2017-2019, by Clayton 
Thomas.  
78 Cost of War Update as of June 30, 2019. 
79 Michael Semple, “The Taliban’s Battle Plan,” Foreign Affairs, November 28, 2018. 

Congressional Research Service  

12 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

support.”80 Notwithstanding direct U.S. support, Afghan political dynamics, particularly the 
willingness of political actors to directly challenge the legitimacy and authority of the central 
government, even by extralegal means, may pose a serious threat to Afghan stability in 2019 and 
beyond, regardless of Taliban military capabilities. Increased political instability, fueled by 
questions about the central government’s authority and competence and rising ethnic tensions, 
may pose as serious a threat to Afghanistan’s future as the Taliban does.81 

A potential collapse of the Afghan military and/or the government that commands it could have 
significant implications for the United States, particularly given the nature of negotiated security 
arrangements. Regardless of how likely the Taliban would be to gain full control over all, or even 
most, of the country, the breakdown of social order and the fracturing of the country into fiefdoms 
controlled by paramilitary commanders and their respective militias may be plausible, even 
probable. Afghanistan experienced a similar situation nearly thirty years ago. Though Soviet 
troops withdrew from Afghanistan by February 1989, Soviet aid continued, sustaining the 
communist government in Kabul for nearly three years. However, the dissolution of the Soviet 
Union in December 1991 ended that aid, and a coalition of mujahedin forces overturned the 
government in April 1992. Almost immediately, mujahedin commanders turned against each 
other, leading to a complex civil war during which the Taliban was founded, grew, and took 
control of most of the country, eventually offering sanctuary to Al Qaeda. While the Taliban and 
Al Qaeda are still “closely allied” according to the UN,82 Taliban forces have clashed repeatedly 
with the Afghan Islamic State affiliate. Under a more unstable future scenario, alliances and 
relationships among extremist groups could evolve or security conditions could change, offering 
new opportunities to transnational terrorist groups. 

In light of these uncertainties, Members of Congress and other U.S. policymakers may reassess 
notions of what success in Afghanistan looks like, examining how potential outcomes might harm 
or benefit U.S. interests, and the relative levels of U.S. engagement and investment required to 
attain them.83 The present condition, which is essentially a stalemate that has existed for several 
years, could persist; some argue that the United States “has the capacity to sustain its commitment 
to Afghanistan for some time to come” at current levels.84 In May 2019, former National Security 
Advisor H.R. McMaster compared the U.S. effort in Afghanistan to an “insurance policy” against 
the negative consequences of the government’s collapse.85 Others counter that “the threat in 
Afghanistan doesn’t warrant a continued U.S. military presence and the associated costs—which 
are not inconsequential.”86 

The Trump Administration has described U.S. policy in Afghanistan as “grounded in the 
fundamental objective of preventing any further attacks on the United States by terrorists 

80 Anwar Iqbal, “Afghan Army to Collapse in Six Months Without US Help: Ghani,” Dawn, January 18, 2018. 
81 Sayed Salahuddin, “Strongman’s Loyalists Show Taliban Isn’t Only Threat in Afghanistan,” Washington Post, July 
4, 2018. 
82 Twenty-second report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 
2368 (2017) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, United Nations Security 
Council, July 27, 2018. 
83 See, for example Jim Banks, “The Public Deserves an Afghanistan War Progress Report,” National Review, October 
23, 2018; Seth Jones, The U.S. Strategy in Afghanistan: The Perils of Withdrawal, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, October 26, 2018. 
84 Semple, op. cit. 
85 Kyle Rempfer, “H.R. McMaster Says The Public Is Fed A ‘War-Weariness’ Narrative That Hurts US Strategy,” 
Military Times, May 9, 2019. 
86 Charles Pena, “We Can’t Win-and Don’t Have To-In Afghanistan.” Real Clear Defense, October 9, 2018. 

Congressional Research Service  

13 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

enjoying safe haven or support in Afghanistan.”87 For years, some analysts have challenged that 
line of reasoning, describing it as a strategic “myth” and arguing that “the safe haven fallacy is an 
argument for endless war based on unwarranted worst-case scenario assumptions.”88 Some of 
these analysts and others dismiss what they see as a disproportionate focus on the military effort, 
citing evidence that “the terror threat to Americans remains low” to argue that “a strategy that 
emphasizes military power will continue to fail.”89  

Core issues for Congress in Afghanistan include Congress’s role in authorizing, appropriating 
funds for, and overseeing U.S. military activities, aid, and regional policy implementation. 
Additionally, Members of Congress may examine how the United States can leverage its assets, 
influence, and experience in Afghanistan, as well as those of Afghanistan’s neighbors and 
international organizations, to encourage more equal, inclusive, and effective governance. 
Congress also could seek to help shape the U.S. approach to talks with the Taliban, or to potential 
negotiations aimed at altering the Afghan political system, through oversight, legislation, and 
public statements.90  

How Afghanistan fits into broader U.S. strategy is another issue on which Members might 
engage, especially given the Administration’s focus on strategic competition with other great 
powers.91 Some analysts recognize fatigue over “endless wars” like that in Afghanistan but argue 
against a potential U.S. retrenchment that could create a vacuum Russia or China might fill.92 
Others describe the U.S. military effort in Afghanistan as a “peripheral war,” and suggest that “the 
billions being spent on overseas contingency operation funding would be better spent on force 
modernization and training for future contingencies.”93  

Author Contact Information 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern Affairs 
[redacted]@crs.loc.gov , 7-....

87 U.S. Department of State, Integrated Country Strategy: Afghanistan, September 27, 2018. 
88 A. Trevor Thrall and Erik Goepner, “Another Year of the War in Afghanistan,” Texas National Security Review, 
September 11, 2018. See also Micah Zenko and Amelia Mae Wolfe, “The Myth of the Terrorist Safe Haven,” Foreign 
Policy, January 26, 2015. 
89 Erik Goepner, In Afghanistan, the Withdrawal of U.S. Troops Is Long Overdue, Cato Institute, September 29, 2017. 
90 Omar Samad, A Pivotal Year Ahead for Afghanistan, Atlantic Council, November 27, 2018. 
91 See CRS In Focus IF11139, Evaluating DOD Strategy: Key Findings of the National Defense Strategy Commission, 
by Kathleen J. McInnis.  
92 Eric Edelman, The US Role In The Middle East In An Era Of Renewed Great Power Competition, Hoover Institution, 
April 2, 2019. 
93 Benjamin Denison, “Confusion in the Pivot: The Muddled Shift from Peripheral War to Great Power Competition,” 
War on the Rocks, February 12, 2019.  

Congressional Research Service  

R45122 · VERSION 34 · UPDATED 

14 

 
 
 
   
 
                                                 
EveryCRSReport.com

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) is a federal legislative branch agency, housed inside the 
Library of Congress, charged with providing the United States Congress non-partisan advice on 
issues that may come before Congress.

EveryCRSReport.com republishes CRS reports that are available to all Congressional staff. The 
reports are not classified, and Members of Congress routinely make individual reports available to 
the public. 

Prior to our republication, we redacted phone numbers and email addresses of analysts who 
produced the reports. We also added this page to the report. We have not intentionally made any 
other changes to any report published on EveryCRSReport.com.

CRS reports, as a work of the United States government, are not subject to copyright protection in 
the United States. Any CRS report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without 
permission from CRS. However, as a CRS report may include copyrighted images or material from a
third party, you may need to obtain permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or 
otherwise use copyrighted material.

Information in a CRS report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public 
understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to members of Congress in 
connection with CRS' institutional role.

EveryCRSReport.com is not a government website and is not affiliated with CRS. We do not claim 
copyright on any CRS report we have republished.

