Costa Rica: An Overview

Costa Rica, a Central American nation of 5.1 million 
people, historically has been an outpost of political and 
economic stability in an often-turbulent region. The United 
States has worked closely with the country to address 
challenges in Central America and to advance shared 
values, such as democracy and human rights, worldwide. 

Political Situation 
Costa Rica has sustained continuous civilian democratic 
governance since 1949, when the country adopted a new 
constitution in the aftermath of a short but violent civil war. 
The center-left (now centrist) National Liberation Party 
(PLN) and a center-right opposition that ultimately became 
the Social Christian Unity Party (PUSC) dominated post-
war politics. The two-party system has collapsed over the 
past 20 years, however, as many Costa Ricans have grown 
disenchanted with the country’s political class and have 
abandoned the traditional parties. This shift has allowed 
newer political forces to contest power, such as the center-
left Citizens’ Action Party (PAC), which has won the past 
two presidential elections. It also has made governance 
more challenging, as party fragmentation in the Legislative 
Assembly has led to increased gridlock. 

Carlos Alvarado of the ruling PAC was elected president 
with nearly 61% of the vote in a second-round runoff 
election in April 2018. He defeated Fabricio Alvarado of 
the conservative National Restoration Party (PRN), who 
had surged to a first place finish in the first-round election 
after he called for Costa Rica to withdraw from the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights in response to the court’s 
advisory opinion that Costa Rica should legalize same-sex 
marriage. President Alvarado, who is 39 years old, 
previously served as Minister of Human Development and 
Social Inclusion and as Minister of Labor and Social 
Security under President Luis Guillermo Solís (2014-2018).  

Since his May 2018 inauguration to a four-year term, 
President Alvarado has taken steps to stabilize Costa Rica’s 
finances and improve citizen security; pushed for new 
investments in infrastructure, education, and training; and 
launched an ambitious plan to reduce Costa Rica’s net 
carbon emissions to zero by 2050. Alvarado appointed a 
multiparty cabinet but needs to forge ad hoc legislative 
coalitions to pass each portion of his policy agenda. The 
PAC holds 10 of 57 seats in the unicameral Legislative 
Assembly; the PLN holds 17 seats, the PUSC holds 9 seats, 
the PRN and a bloc of PRN dissidents each hold 7 seats, 
and the remaining 7 seats are divided among several small 
parties. An April 2019 poll from the University of Costa 
Rica found that 27% of Costa Ricans rate Alvarado’s 
performance “good” or “very good,” 50% rate it “bad” or 
“very bad,” and 22% rate it “average.” 

Updated June 13, 2019

Economic and Social Conditions 
Costa Rica pursued state-led development throughout much 
of the 20th century, but since the1980s, it has implemented 
market-oriented economic policies. In the post-civil war 
period, the Costa Rican government increased public-sector 
employment, established one of the most comprehensive 
social safety nets in Latin America, and supported local 
producers with subsidies and trade barriers. Those policies 
contributed to a rapid expansion of the economy; however, 
a deep recession from 1980 to 1982 led Costa Rica to adopt 
a new economic strategy. The country privatized the 
majority of its state-owned enterprises, adopted free-trade 
zones to attract investment, and gradually opened the 
domestic market to foreign competition.  

Figure 1. Costa Rica at a Glance 

Source: CRS Graphics, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos; 
Centro de Investigación y Estudios Políticos; International Monetary 
Fund; Global Trade Atlas. 

Costa Rica has experienced considerable growth since 
adopting the more outward-oriented economic strategy, but 
many Costa Ricans are dissatisfied with the economy. The 
country’s labor market has grown increasingly divided 
between those involved in newer sectors—such as high-
tech manufacturing, tourism, and business services—that 
provide higher pay and rising wages, and those involved in 
traditional sectors that struggle to compete with imports and 
provide lower pay and more precarious employment 
conditions. Government statistics indicate that about 11% 
of Costa Ricans are unemployed and 46% lack job 
protections and benefits because they work in the untaxed 
and unregulated informal sector. Moreover, 21% of Costa 
Rican households live below the national poverty line. 
Costa Rica’s extensive social welfare expenditures—
equivalent to nearly 24% of gross domestic product 
(GDP)—have helped alleviate these challenges, but higher 
levels of unemployment and informality have eroded the 
tax base necessary to sustain the social safety net. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 
 
President Alvarado has called for a variety of public 
investments to foster economic growth and improve social 
welfare in the rural and coastal regions of Costa Rica that 
have benefitted the least from changes in the economy. 
Nevertheless, he spent most of his first year in office 
pushing through a fiscal reform intended to narrow the 
country’s budget deficit, which exceeded 6% of GDP in 
2017 and 2018 according to the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF). Many economists think further tax and 
expenditure changes will be necessary to put the country’s 
finances on a sustainable path. The IMF forecasts that the 
Costa Rican economy will accelerate slightly from 2.7% 
growth in 2018 to 2.9% growth in 2019. 

U.S.-Costa Rican Relations 
Under President Alvarado, Costa Rica and the United States 
have maintained strong commercial ties and bolstered 
cooperation on regional security issues. Both countries also 
have supported international efforts to resolve the political 
and humanitarian crises in Venezuela and Nicaragua, 
though they sometimes have differed on tactics. 

Trade and Investment Ties 
The United States and Costa Rica were among the seven 
countries that signed the Dominican Republic-Central 
America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-
DR) in 2004. The agreement did not enter into force for 
Costa Rica until January 2009, however, due to significant 
domestic opposition. CAFTA-DR has eliminated tariffs on 
consumer and industrial goods and is scheduled to phase 
out tariffs on most agricultural products by 2020.  

U.S.-Costa Rican trade totaled $11.2 billion in 2018. U.S. 
exports to Costa Rica amounted to $6.3 billion while U.S. 
imports from Costa Rica amounted to $4.9 billion, giving 
the United States a $1.5 billion trade surplus. Top U.S. 
exports to Costa Rica included refined oil products, 
machinery and parts, medical instruments and equipment, 
and plastics. Top U.S. imports from Costa Rica included 
medical instruments and equipment, fruit, electric 
machinery and parts, rubber, and coffee. The United States 
was Costa Rica’s largest trading partner, accounting for 
more than 41% of the country’s total trade in 2018.  

CAFTA-DR also includes a chapter on investment that is 
similar to a bilateral investment treaty. According to the 
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, the accumulated stock 
of U.S. foreign direct investment in Costa Rica was $1.6 
billion in 2017, with the manufacturing sector accounting 
for nearly 86% of the total. 

Security Cooperation 
Although Costa Rica’s institutions have proven more 
resilient than those of its Central American neighbors, the 
country has experienced an increase in organized crime and 
related violence in recent years. Government statistics 
indicate that homicides increased from 411 in 2013 to a 
record-high 603 in 2017, before declining slightly to 586 in 
2018 (a homicide rate of 11.7 per 100,000 residents). Costa 
Rican authorities have linked much of the violence to drug 
trafficking organizations, which use the country as a transit 
and storage point for South American cocaine destined for 
the U.S. market. The Costa Rican government has 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

significantly increased security expenditures in response to 
these challenges, allowing the country to hire additional 
police officers and expand crime prevention programs. 

The United States supports Costa Rica’s efforts to combat 
transnational crime and other security threats. In the 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2019 (P.L. 116-6), for 
example, Congress appropriated $40.7 million of security 
assistance for Costa Rica. That total includes $8.2 million 
in bilateral aid and $32.5 million through the Central 
America Regional Security Initiative (CARSI). U.S. 
assistance has helped Costa Rica acquire equipment, 
including boats, aircraft, and armored vehicles; train 
security and justice-sector personnel; and establish a 
judicial wire intercept program. 

Costa Rica has had a counternarcotics cooperation 
agreement with the United States since 1999, which allows 
the U.S. Coast Guard, working with Costa Rican officials, 
to carry out drug interdiction measures in Costa Rican 
waters. These operations occasionally have generated 
controversy in Costa Rica's Legislative Assembly, which 
must grant permission to U.S. vessels to dock, refuel, and 
resupply in Costa Rican territory. Many Costa Ricans are 
sensitive about the presence of foreign military personnel in 
the country, since Costa Rica abolished its standing military 
in 1949. Nevertheless, the Legislative Assembly has voted 
repeatedly to provide the necessary authorizations. Close 
cooperation with the United States helped Costa Rica seize 
a record-high 33.5 metric tons of cocaine in 2018. 

Migration and Refugee Flows 
As a comparatively prosperous and stable country, Costa 
Rica has long served as a destination for migrants and 
asylum-seekers from other Latin American nations. The 
country has experienced a recent surge in asylum requests, 
however, due to the ongoing political crisis in neighboring 
Nicaragua. According to the U.N. High Commissioner for 
Refugees (UNHCR), more than 55,000 Nicaraguans have 
sought refuge in Costa Rica over the past year. Nearly 
26,000 Venezuelans have also fled to Costa Rica, 5,400 of 
whom have requested asylum. The Costa Rican government 
has sought to provide protection and humanitarian aid to 
those in need, but has called on the international community 
for additional support. According to the U.S. Agency for 
International Development, the United States has provided 
$3.2 million through UNHCR and other humanitarian 
organizations to assist Venezuelans in Costa Rica since 
FY2018. 

In addition to those who have sought refuge in Costa Rica, 
many migrants pass through Costa Rican territory on their 
way to the United States. In recent years, such transitory 
flows have included large numbers of Cubans and Haitians, 
as well as extra-regional migrants from Africa and Asia. 
Costa Rican authorities, with U.S. support, have collected 
biometric data on more than 23,000 extra-regional 
migrants, leading to the identification, detention, and 
deportation of criminals, according to the State Department. 

Peter J. Meyer, Specialist in Latin American Affairs   

IF10908

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10908 · VERSION 3 · UPDATED 

 
 
 
