Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 
In Brief 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern Affairs 

Updated March 11, 2020 

Congressional Research Service 

7-....

www.crs.gov 

R45122 

 
 
  
 
 
SUMMARY 

R45122 

March 11, 2020 

Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 
In Brief 

Afghanistan was elevated as a significant U.S. foreign policy concern in 2001, when the United 
States, in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, led a military campaign against 
Al Qaeda and the Taliban government that harbored and supported it. In the intervening 18 years, 
the United States has suffered around 2,400 military fatalities in Afghanistan (including four in 
combat in 2020 to date) and Congress has appropriated approximately $137 billion for 
reconstruction there. In that time, an elected Afghan government has replaced the Taliban, and 
most measures of human development have improved, although future prospects of those 
measures remain mixed in light of a robust Taliban insurgency and continued terrorist activity. 
The fundamental objective of U.S. efforts in Afghanistan is “preventing any further attacks on the United States by terrorists 
enjoying safe haven or support in Afghanistan.” 

For a copy of the full report, 
please call 7-.... or visit 
www.crs.gov. 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern 
Affairs 
-redacted-@crs.loc.gov 

As of March 2020, U.S. military engagement in Afghanistan appears closer to an end, in light of the February 29, 2020, 
signing of a U.S.-Taliban agreement on the issues of counterterrorism and the presence of U.S. and international troops. The 
formal agreement came after a weeklong reduction in violence designed to test the Taliban’s ability and will to enforce a 
ceasefire, which largely held. As part of the agreement, the United States has committed to withdraw all of its forces within 
14 months, a process that is already underway. In return, the Taliban have committed to not allow members or other groups, 
including Al Qaeda, to use Afghan soil to threaten the United States or its allies, including by preventing recruiting, training, 
and fundraising for such activities. The agreement is accompanied by secret annexes, raising concerns among some Members 
of Congress. U.S. officials describe the prospective U.S. withdrawal as “conditions-based,” but have not specified exactly 
what conditions would halt, reverse, or otherwise alter the timeline laid out in the agreement.  

The U.S.-Taliban agreement envisioned intra-Afghan talks beginning on March 10, 2020, but talks are not yet scheduled 
amid disputes over a potential prisoner exchange and continued Taliban violence. Further complicating the situation is the 
unsettled state of Afghan politics: President Ashraf Ghani was declared the winner of the September 2019 presidential 
election on February 18, 2020, but his chief rival (and former partner in a unity government) Abdullah Abdullah rejects the 
result as fraudulent and has sought to establish himself at the head of an alternate government. In any event, Afghan 
government representatives were not participants in U.S.-Taliban talks, leading some observers to interpret that the United 
States would prioritize a military withdrawal over a complex political settlement that preserves some of the social, political, 
and humanitarian gains made since 2001. Observers speculate about what kind of political arrangement, if any, could satisfy 
both Kabul and the Taliban to the extent that the latter fully abandons armed struggle. 

Many observers anticipate that a full-scale U.S. withdrawal and/or aid cutoff would lead to the collapse of the Afghan 
government and perhaps even the reestablishment of Taliban control, a scenario President Trump said “possibly will” 
happen. By many measures, the Taliban are in a stronger military position now than at any point since 2001, though some 
once-public metrics related to the conduct of the war have been classified or are no longer produced (including district-level 
territorial and population control assessments).  

For additional information on Afghanistan and U.S. policy there, see CRS Report R45818, Afghanistan: Background and 
U.S. Policy, by Clayton Thomas. For background information and analysis on the history of congressional engagement with 
Afghanistan and U.S. policy there, as well as a summary of recent Afghanistan-related legislative proposals, see CRS Report 
R45329, Afghanistan: Issues for Congress and Legislation 2017-2019, by Clayton Thomas. 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Contents 

Overview ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
U.S.-Taliban Agreement .................................................................................................................. 2 
Background: U.S.-Taliban Negotiations ................................................................................... 2 
Prelude: Reduction in Violence (RiV)....................................................................................... 3 
U.S.-Taliban Agreement ............................................................................................................ 3 

Potential Obstacles to Intra-Afghan Talks: Prisoner Exchange, Renewed 

Violence, and Political Disputes ...................................................................................... 4 
Military and Security Situation ....................................................................................................... 6 
U.S. Adversaries: The Taliban and Islamic State ...................................................................... 8 
ANDSF Development and Deployment .................................................................................... 9 
Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors ..................................................................... 10 
Economy and U.S. Aid ................................................................................................................... 11 
Outlook .......................................................................................................................................... 12 

Figures 

Figure 1. Number of Weapons Released (Manned and Remotely Piloted Aircraft strike 

assets) by year .............................................................................................................................. 7 

Appendixes 

Appendix. U.S. Strikes by Month, July-October 2019 .................................................................. 14 

Contacts 

Author Contact Information .......................................................................................................... 15 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Overview 
On February 29, 2020, after more than a year of talks between U.S. and Taliban negotiators, the 
two sides concluded an agreement laying the groundwork for the withdrawal of U.S. armed forces 
from Afghanistan, and for talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban.  

As a prelude, U.S. and Taliban negotiators agreed to a seven-day nationwide “reduction in 
violence,” including attacks against Afghan forces. U.S. military commanders assessed that the 
truce, which began February 22, largely held, leading to the formal U.S.-Taliban agreement on 
February 29. As part of the agreement, the United States is to draw down its forces from 13,000 
to 8,600 within 135 days (with proportionate decreases in allied force levels) and withdraw all of 
its forces within 14 months. That withdrawal is under way as of March 2020. Other U.S. 
commitments include working to facilitate a prisoner exchange between the Taliban and the 
Afghan government and removing U.S. sanctions on Taliban members by August 27, 2020.  

In exchange, the Taliban have committed to not allow its members or other groups, including Al 
Qaeda, to use Afghan soil to threaten the United States or its allies, including by preventing 
recruiting, training, and fundraising for such activities. The agreement also says the Taliban “will 
start intra-Afghan negotiations” on March 10, 2020. It remains unclear to what extent the U.S. 
withdrawal is contingent upon, or otherwise related to, the Taliban holding talks with Kabul or the 
outcome of such talks. As of March 11, 2020, the State Department says “preparations for intra-
Afghan negotiations are underway,” though obstacles, namely continued Taliban attacks and a 
dispute over a potential prisoner exchange, remain. 

Further complicating the situation is the February 18, 2020, announcement of President Ghani’s 
victory in the September 2019 presidential election; his opponents reject the narrow result and 
have sought to establish themselves as a separate government. This has led to fears of a repeat of 
the circumstances surrounding the 2014 presidential election, which prompted a dispute between 
the same two candidates that nearly led to violence and required intensive U.S. diplomacy to 
broker a fragile power-sharing agreement. 

The U.S.-Taliban agreement comes after another violent year in Afghanistan: the United Nations 
reports that over 10,000 civilians were killed or injured in fighting in 2019, down slightly from 
2018. U.S. operations also intensified in 2019, by some measures: the United States dropped 
more munitions in Afghanistan in 2019 than any other year since at least 2010 and U.S. forces 
conducted strikes in 31 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces between July and October 2019.1 By some 
measures, insurgents are in control of or contesting more territory today than at any point since 
2001. The conflict also involves an array of other armed groups, including active affiliates of both 
Al Qaeda (AQ) and the Islamic State (IS, also known as ISIS, ISIL, or Da’esh).  

The United States has appropriated approximately $137 billion in various forms of reconstruction 
aid to Afghanistan over the past 18 years, from building up and sustaining the Afghan National 
Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF) to economic development. This assistance has increased 
Afghan government capacity, but prospects for stability in Afghanistan appear distant. 
Afghanistan’s largely underdeveloped natural resources and/or geographic position at the 
crossroads of future global trade routes could improve the economic life of the country, and, by 
extension, its social and political dynamics. Nevertheless, Afghanistan’s economic and political 
outlook remains uncertain, if not negative, in light of ongoing hostilities.  

1 CRS analysis of U.S. Forces-Afghanistan monthly strike summaries. 

Congressional Research Service  

1 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

U.S.-Taliban Agreement 
On February 29, 2020, after more than a year of official negotiations between U.S. and Taliban 
representatives, the two sides concluded an agreement laying the groundwork for the withdrawal 
of U.S. armed forces from Afghanistan, and for talks between Kabul and the Taliban. Subsequent 
developments, including increased violence and continued gridlock on potential Taliban-Afghan 
government talks, have raised questions about the agreement and broader U.S. policy in 
Afghanistan going forward. 

Background: U.S.-Taliban Negotiations 

In President Donald Trump’s August 2017 speech laying out a revised strategy for Afghanistan, 
he referred to a “political settlement” as an outcome of an “effective military effort,” but did not 
elaborate on what U.S. goals or conditions might be as part of this putative political process. Less 
than one year later, the Trump Administration decided to enter into direct negotiations with the 
Taliban, without the participation of Afghan government representatives. With little to no 
progress on the battlefield, the Trump Administration reversed the long-standing U.S. position 
supporting an “Afghan-led, Afghan-owned reconciliation process,” and the first high-level, direct 
U.S.-Taliban talks occurred in Doha, Qatar, in July 2018.2 The September 2018 appointment by 
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo of Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad, the Afghan-born former U.S. 
Ambassador to Afghanistan under President George W. Bush, as Special Representative for 
Afghanistan Reconciliation added momentum to this effort. 

For almost a year, Khalilzad held a near-continuous series of meetings with Taliban 
representatives in Doha, Qatar, along with consultations with the Afghan, Pakistani, and other 
regional governments. In late January 2019, Khalilzad stated that, “The Taliban have committed, 
to our satisfaction, to do what is necessary that would prevent Afghanistan from ever becoming a 
platform for international terrorist groups or individuals,” in return for which U.S. forces would 
eventually fully withdraw from the country.3 After a longer series of talks that ended in March 
2019, Khalilzad announced that an agreement “in draft” had been reached on counterterrorism 
assurances and U.S. troop withdrawal. He noted that after the agreement was finalized, “the 
Taliban and other Afghans, including the government, will begin intra-Afghan negotiations on a 
political settlement and comprehensive ceasefire.”4  

By August 2019, the process appeared to be reaching its conclusion, with multiple reports 
detailing the outlines of an emerging U.S.-Taliban arrangement.5 However, on September 7, 2019, 
President Trump announced that he had “immediately…called off peace negotiations” because of 
a Taliban attack in Kabul that killed several people, including a U.S. soldier.6 In interviews the 
following day, Secretary Pompeo said that “we were close,” but “the Taliban failed to live up to a 

2 See, for example, Department of Defense, “Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan,” June 2017. 
3 Mujib Mashal, “U.S. and Taliban Agree in Principle to Peace Framework, Envoy Says,” New York Times, January 28, 
2019. 
4 U.S. Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, Twitter, March 12, 2019.  
5 Dan Lamothe, John Hudson, and Pamela Constable, “U.S. preparing to withdraw thousands of troops from 
Afghanistan in initial deal with Taliban,” Washington Post, August 1, 2019. The parameters of this putative 
arrangement closely resembled the February 2020 agreement. 
6 President Trump also revealed that he had invited “major Taliban leaders” and Afghan President Ashraf Ghani to 
meet with him separately at Camp David on the following day. Donald J. Trump, Twitter, September 7, 2019.  

Congressional Research Service  

2 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

series of commitments they had made,” leading President Trump to walk away from the deal.7 
Taliban officials responded to President Trump by warning that the United States would “regret” 
abandoning talks while maintaining that “our doors are open for negotiations.”8  

Within a month, news reports indicated that unofficial talks between Khalilzad and Taliban 
representatives in Pakistan had begun.9 Momentum was strengthened by Afghan President Ashraf 
Ghani’s November 12 announcement of the planned release of three high-profile Taliban 
prisoners from Afghan government custody in exchange for an American and an Australian held 
by the Haqqani Network (a U.S.-designated terrorist organization and semi-autonomous 
component of the Taliban).10 Ghani stated that the release was aimed at “facilitating face-to-face 
talks with the Taliban.”11 On December 4, the State Department announced Khalilzad would 
“rejoin talks with the Taliban to discuss steps that could lead to intra-Afghan negotiations and a 
peaceful settlement of the war, specifically a reduction in violence that leads to a ceasefire.”12  

Prelude: Reduction in Violence (RiV) 

On February 14, 2020, a senior U.S. official revealed that U.S. and Taliban negotiators in Doha 
had reached a “very specific” agreement to reduce violence across the country, including attacks 
against Afghan forces, after which, if U.S. military commanders assessed that the truce held, the 
United States and Taliban would sign a formal agreement. U.S. officials called the reduction in 
violence (sometimes referred to as “RiV”) a test of the Taliban’s intentions and of the group’s 
control over its forces, given the possibility for spoilers to upend the negotiation process. In 
advance of the agreement, Khalilzad reportedly “briefed [U.S.] senators that if violence doesn’t 
abate, the troop withdrawals will stop.”13  

The reduction in violence went into effect on February 22, 2020. U.S. commander General Scott 
Miller said that he was “satisfied that the Taliban made a good-faith effort,” describing episodes 
of violence as “sporadic.”14 On February 26, Miller made a rare public appearance in Kabul, 
walking through crowded streets without body armor and mingling with Afghans to demonstrate 
the reduced threat of violence. According to U.S. and Afghan officials, attacks were down 
significantly across the country, by as much as 80 percent.15  

U.S.-Taliban Agreement 

After the weeklong reduction in violence held, Special Representative Khalilzad signed the 
formal U.S.-Taliban agreement with Taliban deputy political leader Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar 

7 Interview: Secretary Michael R. Pompeo With George Stephanopoulos of ABC’s This Week, U.S. Department of 
State, September 8, 2019. 
8 “Afghanistan war: Taliban tell Trump their ‘doors are open,’” BBC, September 18, 2019. 
9 Asif Shahzad and Jonathan Landy, “U.S. Afghanistan envoy meets Taliban in Pakistan: sources,” Reuters, October 4, 
2019; Jessica Donati, “U.S. Moves to Restart Taliban Peace Process,” Wall Street Journal, October 13, 2019. 
10 For more background on the Haqqani Network, see CRS In Focus IF10604, Al Qaeda and Islamic State Affiliates in 
Afghanistan, by Clayton Thomas.  
11 “Ghani: Haqqani Network Prisoners to Be Freed for AUAF Professors,” TOLO News, November 12, 2019. 
12 Office of the Spokesperson, “Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation Zalmay Khalilzad Travels to 
Afghanistan and Qatar,” December 4, 2019. 
13 David Ignatius, “Trump’s Afghan gamble,” Washington Post, February 16, 2020. 
14 Dan Lamothe, “Inside the U.S. military’s historic week in Afghanistan ahead of a peace deal with the Taliban,” 
Washington Post, February 28, 2020.  
15 Mujib Mashal, “Scarred and Weary, an Afghan Force Wonders: What is Peace?” New York Times, February 27, 
2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

3 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

on February 29, 2020, in front of a number of international observers, including Secretary of State 
Pompeo, in Doha. On the same day in Kabul, Secretary of Defense Mark Esper met with 
President Ghani to issue a joint U.S.-Afghan declaration reaffirming U.S. support for the Afghan 
government and reiterating the Afghan government’s longstanding willingness to negotiate with 
the Taliban without preconditions.  

As part of the U.S.-Taliban agreement, which is about three and a half pages, the United States is 
to draw down its forces from 13,000 to 8,600 within 135 days (with proportionate decreases in 
allied force levels) and withdraw all of its forces within 14 months. Other U.S. commitments 
include working to facilitate a prisoner exchange between the Taliban and the Afghan government 
(more below) and removing U.S. sanctions on Taliban members by August 27, 2020. The 
sanctions removal is contingent upon the start of intra-Afghan negotiations. In exchange, the 
Taliban has committed to not allow members or other groups, including Al Qaeda, to use Afghan 
soil to threaten the U.S. or its allies, including by preventing recruiting, training, and fundraising 
for such activities. The agreement does not appear to formally commit the Taliban to “work 
alongside of us to destroy” Al Qaeda, as Secretary Pompeo asserted in a March 1, 2020, 
interview.  

The peace agreement also states that the Taliban “will start intra-Afghan negotiations” on March 
10, 2020. It remains unclear to what extent the U.S. withdrawal is contingent upon, or otherwise 
related to, the Taliban holding talks with Kabul or the outcome of such talks. In a February 27 
briefing ahead of the agreement signing, one unnamed senior U.S. official said, “if the political 
settlement fails, if the talks fail, there is nothing that obliges the United States to withdraw 
troops,” while another said, “the withdrawal timeline is related to counterterrorism, not political 
outcomes.”16 The deputy U.S. negotiator Molly Phee said on February 18, “We will not prejudge 
the outcome of intra-Afghan negotiations, but we are prepared to support whatever consensus the 
Afghans are able to reach about their future political and governing arrangements.”17 

According to Time, President Ghani told Members of Congress that the agreement contains 
“secret annexes” regarding the continued presence of U.S. counterterrorism forces, the Taliban 
disavowal of Al Qaeda, monitoring mechanisms, and CIA operations in Taliban-controlled areas. 
U.S. officials have said that “there are parts of this agreement that aren’t going to be public, but 
those parts don’t contain any additional commitments by the United States whatsoever,” 
describing the annexes as “confidential procedures for implementation and verification.”18 
Secretary Pompeo has said “every member of Congress will get a chance to see them,” though 
some Members have raised questions about the necessity of classifying these annexes.19 

Potential Obstacles to Intra-Afghan Talks: Prisoner Exchange, Renewed 
Violence, and Political Disputes 

A planned prisoner exchange has emerged as perhaps the most prominent obstacle to the intra-
Afghan talks that are necessary to resolve the war in Afghanistan. Some experts point out that 
“the United States [used] different language in separate documents it agreed with the Taliban and 

16 Briefing with Senior Administration Officials on Next Steps Toward an Agreement on Bringing Peace to 
Afghanistan, February 29, 2020. 
17 Molly Phee, remarks at “Ending Our Endless War in Afghanistan,” United States Institute of Peace, February 18, 
2020. 
18 Kim Dozier, “Secret Annexes, Backroom Deals: Can Zalmay Khalilzad Deliver Afghan Peace for Trump?” Time, 
February 15, 2020; Briefing with Senior Administration Officials, op. cit. 
19 Juliegrace Brufke, “House Republicans sound the alarm on Taliban deal,” The Hill, March 3, 2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

4 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

the Afghan government.”20 Specifically, the U.S.-Taliban agreement reads that “up to” 5,000 
Taliban prisoners and 1,000 Afghan forces held by the Taliban “will be released by March 10, 
2020,” while the U.S.-Afghan government joint declaration states that the Afghan government 
“will participate in a U.S.-facilitated discussion” with the Taliban on “the feasibility of releasing 
significant numbers of prisoners on both sides.” President Ghani signed a decree on March 11, 
2020, that would release 1,500 prisoners within 15 days as long as they provide written 
assurances to remain off the battlefield, with further releases of 500 prisoners every two weeks as 
long as the Taliban engage in talks and reduce violence.21 A Taliban spokesman rejected any 
conditions-based prisoner release as “against the peace accord that we signed” and insisted that 
5,000 prisoners be released before any intra-Afghan talks.22 

Another potential barrier to intra-Afghan talks is the resumption of nationwide violence since the 
U.S.-Taliban agreement. According to Afghan officials, the Taliban carried out at least 76 attacks 
across 24 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces in the four days after the agreement was signed, a 
number of attacks similar to the weeks before the reduction in violence.23 A U.S. military 
spokesman said that the Taliban conducted 43 attacks against Afghan forces in Helmand province 
on March 3 alone, in response to which the United States conducted its first airstrike in 
Afghanistan in 11 days.24 A Taliban leader reportedly said that U.S. airstrikes do not violate the 
agreement as long as they are retaliation against Taliban attacks against Afghan forces and not 
offensive attacks against Taliban forces.25 However, the Afghan government reported 11 Taliban 
attacks on March 4 and three Taliban attacks on March 5, making any interpretation of longer 
term trends difficult. The Taliban denied responsibility for a large-scale attack that killed at least 
32 at a memorial for a prominent Shia leader in Kabul on March 6; an attack on the same event 
last year was claimed by the Islamic State.26  

Military officials have given differing interpretations of Taliban attacks. Secretary of Defense 
Esper said in a March 2 media availability that “our expectation is that the reduction in violence 
will continue, it [will] taper off until we get intra-Afghan negotiations.”27 It is not clear what the 
basis for that “expectation” is; there is no provision in the U.S.-Taliban agreement committing the 
Taliban to continue to refrain from attacking Afghan forces. In March 4 testimony, Chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley described Taliban violence since the agreement signing as 
“small, lower level attacks” that were “all beaten back.”28 CENTCOM Commander General 
Frank McKenzie said on March 10 that “Taliban attacks are higher than we believe are consistent 
with an idea to actually carry out” the U.S.-Taliban agreement.29 

20 Frud Bezhan, “The Historic U.S.-Taliban Deal May Already Be Unraveling Over These Two Key Issues,” RFE/RL, 
March 3, 2020. 
21 Hamid Shalizi, “Exclusive: Afghan government to release 1,500 Taliban prisoners from jails-decree,” Reuters, 
March 10, 2020.  
22 “Afghan government to free 1,500 prisoners; Taliban demands 5,000,” Reuters, March 11, 2020.  
23 Najim Rahim and Mujib Mashal, “Taliban Ramp Up Attacks on Afghans After Trump Says ‘No Violence,” New 
York Times, March 4, 2020.  
24 USFOR-A Spokesman Col. Sonny Leggett (@USFOR-A), Twitter, 3:14AM, March 4, 2020. 
25 “U.S. airstrike in Afghanistan hits Taliban 4 days after Trump admin. signs peace deal,” CBS News, March 5, 2020. 
26 “Casualties feared as gunmen stormed Mazari’s memorial ceremony in Kabul,” Khaama Press, March 6, 2020. 
27 Defense Secretary Esper and Joint Chiefs of Staff Milley Hold Media Availability, March 2, 2020. 
28 Department of Defense Budget Posture, Senate Armed Services Committee, March 4, 2020. 
29 Morgan Phillips, “US Commander disappointed with Taliban peace efforts: Violence ‘higher’ than agreement 
allows,” Fox News, March 10, 2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

5 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Further potentially complicating the situation is the February 18, 2020, announcement of 
President Ghani’s victory in the September 2019 presidential election over former Chief 
Executive Officer Abdullah Abdullah. Abdullah and his supporters reject the narrow result as 
fraudulent and have sought to establish themselves as a separate government.30 This has led to 
fears of a repeat of the circumstances surrounding the 2014 presidential election, which prompted 
a dispute between the same two candidates that nearly led to violence and required intensive U.S. 
diplomacy to broker a fragile power-sharing agreement. Despite Special Representative 
Khalilzad’s attempts to mediate, Ghani and Abdullah held separate inauguration ceremonies on 
March 9, 2020. The presence of Khalilzad, along with other senior U.S. and foreign officials, at 
Ghani’s ceremony indicates at least a measure of international recognition for Ghani. It is unclear 
what kind of governing arrangement could satisfy Abdullah and his supporters, who argue that 
Ghani did not uphold the previous power-sharing agreement. Ghani abolished the office of the 
Chief Executive in a March 11, 2020, decree, arguing that his inauguration as president made the 
position obsolete. The two sides have also disagreed over the size and composition of the 
prospective negotiating team to meet with the Taliban. 

It remains unclear what kind of political arrangement could satisfy both Kabul and the Taliban to 
the extent that the latter abandons its armed struggle. Afghan President Ghani has promised that 
his government will not accept any settlement that limits Afghans’ rights and has warned that any 
agreement to withdraw U.S. forces that did not include Kabul’s participation could lead to 
“catastrophe,” pointing to the 1990s-era civil strife following the fall of the Soviet-backed 
government that led to the rise of the Taliban.31 Afghans opposed to the Taliban doubt the group’s 
trustworthiness, and express concern that, in the absence of U.S. military pressure, the group will 
have little incentive to comply with the terms of an agreement, the most crucial aspect of which 
would arguably be concluding a comprehensive political settlement with the Afghan 
government.32 The Taliban have given contradictory signs, and generally do not describe in detail 
their vision for post-settlement Afghan governance beyond referring to it as a subject for intra-
Afghan negotiations.33 While many Afghans, especially women, who remember Taliban rule and 
oppose the group’s policies and beliefs remain wary,34 a December 2019 survey reported that a 
“significant majority” of Afghans are both aware of (77%) and strongly or somewhat support 
(89%) efforts to negotiate a peace agreement with the Taliban.35  

Military and Security Situation  
As of March 2020, there are approximately 12,000 U.S. forces in Afghanistan. 8,000 of these are 
part of the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan of 16,600 troops, known as Resolute Support 
Mission (RSM). RSM has trained, advised, and assisted Afghan government forces since its 
inception in early 2015, when Afghan forces assumed responsibility for security nationwide. 

30 “Abdullah Rejects Results, Announces Formation of ‘Inclusive Govt,’” TOLO News, February 18, 2020.  
31 “Afghans Worry as US Makes Progress in Taliban Talks,” Voice of America, January 29, 2019. 
32 “Afghans voice fears that the U.S. is undercutting them in deal with the Taliban,” Washington Post, August 17, 2019. 
33 Middle East Media Research Institute, “Afghan Taliban Spokesman Suhail Shaheen On Failed U.S.-Taliban Talks,” 
September 19, 2019. One spokesman said in January 2019 that the group is “not seeking a monopoly on power;” 
another in May spoke of the group’s “determination to reestablish the Islamic Emirate in Afghanistan.” Kathy Gannon, 
“Taliban Say They Are Not Looking to Rule Afghanistan Alone,” Associated Press, January 30, 2019; Abdul Qadir 
Sediqi and Rupman Jain, “Taliban Fighters Double as Reporters to Wage Afghan Digital War,” Reuters, May 10, 2019. 
34 Pamela Constable, “The Return of a Taliban Government? Afghanistan Talks Raise Once-Unthinkable Question,” 
Washington Post, January 29, 2019. 
35 The Asia Foundation, “Afghanistan in 2019: A Survey of the Afghan People,” released December 3, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

6 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Combat operations by U.S. forces also continue and have increased in number since 2017. These 
two “complementary missions” comprise Operation Freedom’s Sentinel.36  

As mentioned above, the United States has committed to withdrawing all U.S. forces within 14 
months, a long-stated goal of President Trump, who has publicly declared his frustration with 
how long U.S. forces have been in Afghanistan and his intention to withdraw them from the 
country. President Trump’s desire to withdraw U.S. forces reportedly stems at least in part from 
frustration with the state of the conflict, which U.S. military officials have assessed as a “strategic 
stalemate” since at least early 2017.37  

Arguably complicating that assessment, the U.S. government has withheld many once-public 
metrics of military progress. Notably, the U.S. military is “no longer producing its district-level 
stability assessments of Afghan government and insurgent control and influence.”38 This 
information, which was in every previous Special Inspector General for Afghanistan 
Reconstruction (SIGAR) quarterly report going back to January 2016, estimated the extent of 
Taliban control and influence in terms of both territory and population; SIGAR reports it was told 
by the U.S. military that the assessment is no longer being produced because it “was of limited 
decision-making value to the [U.S.] Commander.”39 The last reported metrics from SIGAR in its 
January 30, 2019, report, illustrated that the share of districts under government control or 
influence fell to 53.8%, as of October 2018. This figure, which marked a slight decline from 
previous reports, was the lowest recorded by SIGAR since tracking began in November 2015; 
12% of districts were under insurgent control or influence, with the remaining 34% contested.  

Figure 1. Number of Weapons Released (Manned and Remotely Piloted Aircraft 
strike assets) by year 

Source: Combined Forces Air Component Commander 2013-2019 Airpower Statistics. 

36 Lead Inspector General for Overseas Contingency Operations, Operation Freedom’s Sentinel, Quarterly Report to 
Congress, July 1 to September 30, 2018, November 19, 2018. 
37 Department of Defense Press Briefing by Secretary Esper and General Milley in the Pentagon Briefing Room, 
December 20, 2019. 
38 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2019. 
39 Ibid. 

Congressional Research Service  

7 

 
 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

At the same time, U.S. air operations have escalated considerably under the Trump 
Administration, as measured by the number of munitions released; the U.S. dropped more 
munitions in Afghanistan in 2019 than any other year since at least 2010 (see Figure 1). These 
operations have reportedly contributed to a sharp rise in civilian casualties; the U.N. reported that 
the third quarter of 2019 saw the highest quarterly civilian casualty toll since tracking began in 
2009, with over 4,300 civilians killed or injured from July 1 to September 30.40 Though the 
majority of civilian casualties are attributed to anti-government forces, the U.N. reported in 
October that civilian casualties from air operations (885 killed or injured) set a record in the first 
nine months of 2019, with 74% of those casualties resulting from operations by international 
forces. Between July and October 2019, U.S. forces conducted 3,257 strikes in 31 of 
Afghanistan’s 34 provinces (see Appendix).41 

U.S. Adversaries: The Taliban and Islamic State 

The leader of the Taliban is Haibatullah Akhundzada, who is known as emir al-mu’minin, or 
commander of the faithful; the Taliban style themselves as the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. 
Haibatullah succeeded Mullah Mansoor, who was killed in a 2016 U.S. airstrike in Pakistan; 
Mansoor had succeeded Taliban founder Mullah Omar, who died of natural causes in April 2013. 
Formerly a figure in Taliban religious courts, Haibatullah is generally regarded as “more of an 
Islamic scholar than a military tactician.”42 Still, under his leadership the Taliban have achieved 
some notable military successes and the group is seen as more cohesive and less susceptible to 
fragmentation than in the past.43 There are an estimated 60,000 full-time Taliban fighters. 

The Taliban retain the ability to conduct high-profile urban attacks while also demonstrating 
considerable tactical capabilities; SIGAR reported in January 2020 that the number of enemy 
attacks in the fourth quarter of 2019 “exceeded same-period levels in every year since recording 
began in 2010.”44 Reports indicate that ANDSF fatalities have averaged 30-40 a day in recent 
months, and President Ghani stated in January 2019 that over 45,000 security personnel had paid 
“the ultimate sacrifice” since he took office in September 2014.45 Insider attacks on U.S. and 
coalition forces by Afghan nationals are a sporadic, but persistent, problem.  

Beyond the Taliban, a significant share of U.S. operations have been aimed at the local Islamic 
State affiliate, known as Islamic State-Khorasan Province (ISKP, also known as ISIS-K). 
Estimates of ISKP strength generally ranged from 2,000 to 4,000 fighters until ISKP “collapsed” 
in late 2019 due to offensives by U.S. and Afghan forces and, separately, the Taliban.46 Special 
Representative Khalilzad recognized the Taliban’s role in progress against ISKP, while warning 
that ISKP “hasn’t been eliminated.”47 ISKP and Taliban forces have sometimes fought over 
control of territory or because of political or other differences.48 Some U.S. officials have stated 

40 United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Quarterly Report on the Protection of Civilians in 
Armed Conflict, October 17, 2019. 
41 U.S. Forces-Afghanistan, September 2019 Strike Summary, October 27, 2019. 
42 “Red on Red: Analyzing Afghanistan’s Intra-Insurgency Violence,” CTC Sentinel, vol. 11, iss. 1, January 2018. 
43 Andrew Watkins, “Taliban Fragmentation: A Figment of Your Imagination?” War on the Rocks, September 4, 2019. 
44 See also Alec Worsnop, From Guerilla to Maneuver Warfare: A Look at the Taliban’s Growing Combat Capability, 
Modern War Institute, June 6, 2018.  
45 “Afghanistan’s Ghani says 45,000 Security Personnel Killed Since 2014,” BBC, January 25, 2019.  
46 “ISIS Is Losing Afghan Territory. That Means Little for Its Victims,” New York Times, December 2, 2019. 
47 U.S. Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, Twitter, December 3, 2019. 
48 See, for example, Amira Jadoon et al., “Challenging the ISK Brand in Afghanistan-Pakistan: Rivalries and Divided 

Congressional Research Service  

8 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

that ISKP aspires to conduct attacks in the West, though there is reportedly disagreement within 
the U.S. government about the nature of the threat.49 ISKP also has claimed responsibility for a 
number of large-scale attacks, many targeting Afghanistan’s Shia minority. Some raise the 
prospect of Taliban hardliners defecting to ISKP in the event that Taliban leaders agree to a 
political settlement or to a continued U.S. counterterrorism presence.50 The United Nations 
reported in January 2020 that Al Qaeda leaders were “concerned” by U.S.-Taliban talks, but that 
relations between Al Qaeda and the Taliban “continue to be close and mutually beneficial, with 
[Al Qaeda] supplying resources and training in exchange for protection.”51 

ANDSF Development and Deployment  

The effectiveness of the ANDSF is key to the security of Afghanistan. Congress appropriated at 
least $86.4 billion for Afghan security assistance between FY2002 and FY2019, according to 
SIGAR.52 Since 2014, the United States generally has provided around 75% of the estimated $5 
billion to $6 billion a year required to fund the ANDSF, with the balance coming from U.S. 
partners ($1 billion annually) and the Afghan government ($500 million). 

Concerns about the ANDSF raised by SIGAR, the Department of Defense, and others include 
absenteeism, the fact that about 35% of the force does not reenlist each year, and the potential for 
rapid recruitment to dilute the force’s quality; widespread illiteracy within the force; credible 
allegations of child sexual abuse and other potential human rights abuses;53 and casualty rates 
often described as unsustainable. 

Total ANDSF strength was reported at about 273,000 as of October 2019, up 19,000 from the 
previous quarter. The U.S. military attributed the increase to changes in enrollment verification 
processes and added that “quarter-to-quarter changes in ANDSF assigned strength do not solely 
reflect changes to the number of personnel actually serving in the ANDSF.”54 Other metrics 
related to ANDSF performance, including casualty and attrition rates, have been classified by 
U.S. Forces-Afghanistan (USFOR-A) starting with the October 2017 SIGAR quarterly report, 
citing a request from the Afghan government, although SIGAR had previously published those 
metrics as part of its quarterly reports.55 In both legislation and public statements, some Members 
of Congress have expressed concern over the decline in the types and amount of information 
made public by the executive branch.  

Loyalties,” CTC Sentinel, vol. 11, iss. 4, April 26, 2018; Najim Rahim and Rod Nordland, “Taliban Surge Routs ISIS 
in Northern Afghanistan,” New York Times, August 1 2018. 
49 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Julian Barnes, “U.S. Military Calls ISIS in Afghanistan a Threat to the West. Intelligence 
Officials Disagree,” New York Times, August 2, 2019. 
50 David Ignatius, “Uncertainty Clouds the Path Forward in Afghanistan.” Washington Post, July 22, 2019. 
51 Twenty-fifth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2368 
(2017) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, S/2020/53, January 20, 2020. 
52 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January 30, 2020. 
53 See SIGAR Report 17-47, Child Sexual Assault in Afghanistan: Implementation of the Leahy Laws and Reports of 
Assault by Afghan Security Forces, June 2017 (released on January 23, 2018). 
54 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January 30, 2020. 
55 “Report: US Officials Classify Crucial Metrics on Afghan Casualties, Readiness,” Military Times, October 30, 2017. 

Congressional Research Service  

9 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors 
Regional dynamics, and the involvement of outside powers, are central to the conflict in 
Afghanistan. The neighboring state widely considered most important in this regard is Pakistan, 
which has played an active, and by many accounts negative, role in Afghan affairs for decades. 
Pakistan’s security services maintain ties to Afghan insurgent groups, most notably the Haqqani 
Network.56 Afghan leaders, along with U.S. military commanders, attribute much of the 
insurgency’s power and longevity either directly or indirectly to Pakistani support; President 
Trump has accused Pakistan of “housing the very terrorists that we are fighting.”57 U.S. officials 
have long identified militant safe havens in Pakistan as a threat to security in Afghanistan, though 
some Pakistani officials dispute that charge and note the Taliban’s increased territorial control 
within Afghanistan itself.58 

Pakistan may view a weak and destabilized Afghanistan as preferable to a strong, unified Afghan 
state (particularly one led by an ethnic Pashtun-dominated government in Kabul; Pakistan has a 
large and restive Pashtun minority).59 However, instability in Afghanistan could rebound to 
Pakistan’s detriment; Pakistan has struggled with indigenous Islamist militants of its own. 
Afghanistan-Pakistan relations are further complicated by the presence of over a million Afghan 
refugees in Pakistan, as well a long-running and ethnically tinged dispute over their shared 1,600-
mile border.60 Pakistan’s security establishment, fearful of strategic encirclement by India, 
apparently continues to view the Afghan Taliban as a relatively friendly and reliably anti-India 
element in Afghanistan. India’s diplomatic and commercial presence in Afghanistan—and U.S. 
rhetorical support for it—exacerbates Pakistani fears of encirclement. Indian interest in 
Afghanistan stems largely from India’s broader regional rivalry with Pakistan, which impedes 
Indian efforts to establish stronger and more direct commercial and political relations with 
Central Asia. India has been the largest regional contributor to Afghan reconstruction, but New 
Delhi has not shown an inclination to pursue a deeper defense relationship with Kabul. 

Since late 2018, the Trump Administration has been seeking Islamabad’s assistance in facilitating 
U.S. talks with the Taliban. One important action taken by Pakistan was the October 2018 release 
of Taliban co-founder Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who was captured in Karachi in a joint U.S.-
Pakistani operation in 2010. Khalilzad said in February 2019 that Baradar’s release “was my 
request,” and later thanked Pakistan for facilitating the travel of Taliban figures to talks in Doha.61 
Baradar went on to sign the U.S.-Taliban agreement alongside Khalilzad. A biannual Department 

56 For more, see CRS In Focus IF10604, Al Qaeda and Islamic State Affiliates in Afghanistan, by Clayton Thomas.  
57 White House, Remarks by President Trump on the Strategy in Afghanistan and South Asia, August 21, 2017. 
58 Author interviews with Pakistani military officials, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, February 21, 2018. 
59 Pashtuns are an ethnic group that makes up about 40% of Afghanistan’s 35 million people and 15% of Pakistan’s 215 
million; they thus represent a plurality in Afghanistan but are a relatively small minority among many others in 
Pakistan, though Pakistan’s Pashtun population is considerably larger than Afghanistan’s. Pakistan condemns as 
interference statements by President Ashraf Ghani (who is Pashtun) and other Afghan leaders about an ongoing protest 
campaign by Pakistani Pashtuns for greater civil and political rights. “Pakistan cautions Afghan president against 
‘interfering’ in internal matters,” Express Tribune, January 27, 2020.  
60 About 2 million Afghan refugees have returned from Pakistan since the Taliban fell in 2011, but 1.4 million 
registered refugees remain in Pakistan, according to the United Nations, along with perhaps as many as 1 million 
unregistered refugees. Many of these refugees are Pashtuns (see Amnesty International, Afghanistan’s Refugees: Forty 
Years of Dispossession, June 20, 2019). Pakistan, the United Nations, and others recognize the Durand Line as an 
international boundary, but Afghanistan does not. 
61 “Mullah Baradar released by Pakistan at the behest of US: Khalilzad,” The Hindu, February 9, 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

10 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

of Defense report on Afghanistan released in January 2020 asserted that “Pakistan is supporting 
the Afghan reconciliation,” describing Pakistan’s role as “constructive but limited.”62  

Afghanistan largely maintains cordial ties with its other neighbors, notably the post-Soviet states 
of Central Asia, whose role in Afghanistan has been relatively limited but could increase.63 In the 
past two years, multiple U.S. commanders have warned of increased levels of assistance, and 
perhaps even material support, for the Taliban from Russia and Iran, both of which cite IS 
presence in Afghanistan to justify their activities.64 Both nations were opposed to the Taliban 
government of the late 1990s, but reportedly see the Taliban as a useful point of leverage vis-a-vis 
the United States. Afghanistan may also represent a growing priority for China in the context of 
broader Chinese aspirations in Asia and globally.65  

Economy and U.S. Aid 
Economic development is pivotal to Afghanistan’s long-term stability, though indicators of future 
growth are mixed. Decades of war have stunted the development of most domestic industries, 
including mining.66 The economy has also been hurt by a steep decrease in the amount of aid 
provided by international donors. Afghanistan’s gross domestic product (GDP) has grown an 
average of 7% per year since 2003, but growth rates averaged between 2% and 3% in recent 
years. Social conditions in Afghanistan remain equally mixed. On issues ranging from human 
trafficking to religious freedom to women’s rights, Afghanistan has, by some accounts, made 
significant progress since 2001, but future prospects in these areas remain uncertain.  

Congress has appropriated nearly $137 billion in aid for Afghanistan since FY2002, with about 
63% for security and 26% for development (with the remainder for civilian operations and 
humanitarian aid).67 The Administration’s FY2021 budget requests $4 billion for the ANDSF, 
$250 million in Economic Support Funds, and smaller amounts to help the Afghan government 
with other tasks like counternarcotics.68 These figures represent a decrease from both the FY2020 
request, as well as FY2019 enacted levels. Other than ANDSF funding and other DOD 
contributions, these figures are not included in the cost of U.S. combat operations (including 
related regional support activities), which was estimated at a total of $776 billion since FY2002 
as of September 2019, according to the DOD’s Cost of War report. In its FY2021 budget request, 
the Pentagon included $14 billion in direct war costs in Afghanistan (down from the FY2020 
request of $18.6 billion), as well as $32.5 billion in “enduring requirements” and $16 billion in 

62 DOD, Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan, December 2019 (released January 23, 2020). 
63 Humayun Hamidzada and Richard Ponzio, Central Asia’s Growing Role in Building Peace and Regional 
Connectivity with Afghanistan, United States Institute of Peace, August 2019. 
64 In October 2018, the Trump Administration sanctioned several Iranian military officials for providing support to the 
Taliban. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury and the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center Partners Sanction 
Taliban Facilitators and their Iranian Supporters, October 23, 2018. 
65 Ibid; Michael Martina, “Afghan Troops to Train in China, Ambassador Says,” Reuters, September 6, 2018. 
66 Much attention has been paid to Afghanistan’s potential mineral and hydrocarbon resources, which by some 
estimates could be considerable but have yet to be fully explored or developed. Once estimated at nearly $1 trillion, the 
value of Afghan mineral deposits has since been revised downward, but those deposits reportedly have attracted 
interest from the Trump Administration. Mark Landler and James Risen, “Trump Finds Reason for the U.S. to Remain 
in Afghanistan: Minerals,” New York Times, July 25, 2017. Additionally, Afghanistan’s geographic location could 
position it as a transit country for others’ resources.  
67 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, January 30, 2020. 
68 For more, see CRS Report R45329, Afghanistan: Issues for Congress and Legislation 2017-2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

11 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) funding for “base requirements;” it is unclear how 
much of the latter two figures is for Afghanistan versus other theaters. 

Outlook 
The February 29, 2020, signing of the U.S.-Taliban agreement represents a significant moment 
for Afghanistan and U.S. policy there. Still, U.S. officials caution that the agreement is “just a 
first step,” and shifts in political and/or security dynamics may alter the will of various parties to 
abide by the agreement.69 In any event, while the U.S.-Taliban agreement envisions intra-Afghan 
talks that nearly all observers describe as essential to bringing lasting peace to Afghanistan, 
concrete progress towards those talks remain elusive.  

U.S. officials generally say that the Taliban do not pose an existential threat to the Afghan 
government, given the current military balance. That dynamic could change if the United States 
alters the level or nature of its troop deployments in Afghanistan (per the U.S.-Taliban agreement) 
or reduces funding for the ANDSF. President Ghani has said, “[W]e will not be able to support 
our army for six months without U.S. [financial] support.”70 Notwithstanding direct U.S. support, 
Afghan political dynamics, particularly the willingness of political actors to directly challenge the 
legitimacy and authority of the central government, even by extralegal means, may pose a serious 
threat to Afghan stability in 2020 and beyond, regardless of Taliban military capabilities. 
Increased political instability, fueled by questions about the central government’s competence, 
continued divisions among Afghan elites, and rising ethnic tensions, may pose as serious a threat 
to Afghanistan’s future as the Taliban does. 

A potential collapse of the Afghan military and/or the government that commands it could have 
significant implications for the United States, particularly given the nature of negotiated security 
arrangements. Regardless of how likely the Taliban would be to gain full control over all, or even 
most, of the country, the breakdown of social order and the fracturing of the country into fiefdoms 
controlled by paramilitary commanders and their respective militias may be plausible, even 
probable. Afghanistan experienced a similar situation nearly 30 years ago. Though Soviet troops 
withdrew from Afghanistan by February 1989, Soviet aid continued, sustaining the communist 
government in Kabul for nearly three years. However, the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 
December 1991 ended that aid, and a coalition of mujahedin forces overturned the government in 
April 1992.71 Almost immediately, mujahedin commanders turned against each other, leading to a 
complex civil war during which the Taliban was founded, grew, and took control of most of the 
country, eventually offering sanctuary to Al Qaeda. While the Taliban and Al Qaeda are still 
closely aligned, Taliban forces have clashed repeatedly with the Afghan Islamic State affiliate. 
Under a more unstable future scenario, alliances and relationships among these and other groups 
could evolve, offering new opportunities to transnational terrorist groups. 

The Trump Administration has described U.S. policy in Afghanistan as “grounded in the 
fundamental objective of preventing any further attacks on the United States by terrorists 
enjoying safe haven or support in Afghanistan.”72 For years, some analysts have challenged that 
line of reasoning, describing it as a strategic “myth” and arguing that “the safe haven fallacy is an 

69 Kathryn Wheelbarger, testimony before House Armed Service Committee, March 10, 2020. 
70 Anwar Iqbal, “Afghan Army to Collapse in Six Months Without US Help: Ghani,” Dawn, January 18, 2018. 
71 For more on the mujahedin, see CRS Report R45818, Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy. 
72 U.S. Department of State, Integrated Country Strategy: Afghanistan, September 27, 2018. 

Congressional Research Service  

12 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

argument for endless war based on unwarranted worst-case scenario assumptions.”73 Some of 
these analysts and others dismiss what they see as a disproportionate focus on the military effort, 
arguing that U.S. policy goals like countering narcotics and safeguarding human rights are “not 
objectives that the U.S. military…is well suited to addressing.”74  

Core issues for Congress in Afghanistan include Congress’s role in authorizing, appropriating 
funds for, and overseeing U.S. military activities, aid, and regional policy implementation. 
Additionally, Members of Congress may examine how the United States can leverage its assets, 
influence, and experience in Afghanistan, as well as those of Afghanistan’s neighbors and 
international organizations, to encourage more equal, inclusive, and effective governance. 
Congress also could seek to help shape the U.S. approach to talks with the Taliban, or to potential 
negotiations aimed at altering the Afghan political system, through oversight, legislation, and 
public statements.  

In light of the U.S.-Taliban agreement, Members of Congress and other U.S. policymakers may 
reassess notions of what success in Afghanistan looks like, examining how potential outcomes 
might harm or benefit U.S. interests, and the relative levels of U.S. engagement and investment 
required to attain them.75 The Washington Post’s December 2019 publication of the “Afghanistan 
Papers” (largely records of SIGAR interviews conducted as part of a lessons learned project) 
ignited debate, including reactions from some Members of Congress, on these very issues (for 
more, see CRS Report R46197, The Washington Post’s “Afghanistan Papers” and U.S. Policy: 
Main Points and Possible Questions for Congress, by Clayton Thomas).  

How Afghanistan fits into broader U.S. strategy is another issue on which Members might 
engage, especially given the Administration’s focus on strategic competition with other great 
powers.76 Some analysts recognize fatigue over “endless wars” like that in Afghanistan but argue 
against a potential U.S. retrenchment that could create a vacuum Russia or China might fill.77 
Others describe the U.S. military effort in Afghanistan as a “peripheral war,” and suggest that “the 
billions being spent on overseas contingency operation funding would be better spent on force 
modernization and training for future contingencies.”78  

73 A. Trevor Thrall and Erik Goepner, “Another Year of the War in Afghanistan,” Texas National Security Review, 
September 11, 2018. See also Micah Zenko and Amelia Mae Wolfe, “The Myth of the Terrorist Safe Haven,” Foreign 
Policy, January 26, 2015. 
74 John Glaser and John Mueller, “Afghanistan: A Failure to Tell the Truth,” LobeLog, September 13, 2019.  
75 See, for example Jim Banks, “The Public Deserves an Afghanistan War Progress Report,” National Review, October 
23, 2018; Seth Jones, The U.S. Strategy in Afghanistan: The Perils of Withdrawal, Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, October 26, 2018. 
76 See CRS In Focus IF11139, Evaluating DOD Strategy: Key Findings of the National Defense Strategy Commission, 
by Kathleen J. McInnis.  
77 The US Role In The Middle East In An Era Of Renewed Great Power Competition, Hoover Institution, April 2, 2019. 
78 Benjamin Denison, “Confusion in the Pivot: The Muddled Shift from Peripheral War to Great Power Competition,” 
War on the Rocks, February 12, 2019.  

Congressional Research Service  

13 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Appendix. U.S. Strikes by Month, July-October 2019 

Source: Created by CRS. Data from NATO Resolute Support Strike Summaries; boundaries from GADM. 
Note: According to Resolute Support, summaries include “all strikes conducted by fighter, attack, bomber, 
rotary-wing, or remotely piloted aircraft, rocket-propelled artillery and ground-based tactical artillery.” Resolute 
Support defines a strike as “one or more kinetic engagements that occur in roughly the same geographic location 
to produce a single, sometimes cumulative effect in that location” against the Taliban and other armed groups. 

Congressional Research Service  

14 

 
 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy In Brief 

Author Contact Information 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern Affairs 
[redacted]@crs.loc.gov , 7-....

Acknowledgments 

The graphic “U.S. Airstrikes by Month” was prepared by Amber Wilhelm, Visual Information Specialist, 
based on data analysis by Sarah Collins, Research Assistant.  

Congressional Research Service  

R45122 · VERSION 36 · UPDATED 

15 

 
 
 
 
   
 
EveryCRSReport.com

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) is a federal legislative branch agency, housed inside the 
Library of Congress, charged with providing the United States Congress non-partisan advice on 
issues that may come before Congress.

EveryCRSReport.com republishes CRS reports that are available to all Congressional staff. The 
reports are not classified, and Members of Congress routinely make individual reports available to 
the public. 

Prior to our republication, we redacted phone numbers and email addresses of analysts who 
produced the reports. We also added this page to the report. We have not intentionally made any 
other changes to any report published on EveryCRSReport.com.

CRS reports, as a work of the United States government, are not subject to copyright protection in 
the United States. Any CRS report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without 
permission from CRS. However, as a CRS report may include copyrighted images or material from a
third party, you may need to obtain permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or 
otherwise use copyrighted material.

Information in a CRS report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public 
understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to members of Congress in 
connection with CRS' institutional role.

EveryCRSReport.com is not a government website and is not affiliated with CRS. We do not claim 
copyright on any CRS report we have republished.

