Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: 
In Brief 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern Affairs 

Updated May 1, 2020 

Congressional Research Service 

7-....

www.crs.gov 

R45122 

 
 
  
 
 
SUMMARY 

R45122 

Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: 
In Brief 
Afghanistan was elevated as a significant U.S. foreign policy concern in 2001, when the 
United  States, in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, led a military 
campaign against Al  Qaeda and the Taliban government that harbored and supported it. 
In the intervening 18 years, the United States has suffered around 2,400 military 
fatalities  in Afghanistan (including four in combat in 2020 to date) and Congress has 
appropriated approximately $137 billion  for reconstruction there. In that time, an elected 
Afghan government has replaced the Taliban, and most measures of human development 
have improved, although future prospects of those measures remain mixed. The fundamental objective of U.S. 
efforts in Afghanistan is “preventing any further attacks on the United States by terrorists enjoying safe haven or 
support in Afghanistan.” 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern 
Affairs 
-redacted-@crs.loc.gov 

For a copy of the full report, 
please call 7-.... or visit 
www.crs.gov. 

May 1, 2020 

As of May 2020, U.S. military engagement in Afghanistan appears closer to an end, in light  of the February 29, 
2020, signing of a U.S.-Taliban agreement on the issues of counterterrorism and the withdrawal of U.S. and 
international  troops, but questions remain. As part of the agreement, the United States has committed to withdraw 
all  of its forces within 14 months, a process that is already underway. In return, the Taliban have committed to not 
allow other groups, including Al  Qaeda, to use Afghan soil to threaten the United  States or its allies, including  by 
preventing recruiting, training, and fundraising for such activities. The agreement is accompanied by secret 
annexes, raising concerns among some Members of Congress. U.S. officials describe the prospective U.S. 
withdrawal as “conditions-based,” but have not specified exactly what conditions would halt, reverse, or 
otherwise alter the withdrawal timeline  laid  out in the agreement.  

Afghan government representatives were not participants in U.S.-Taliban talks, leading some observers to 
interpret that the United  States would prioritize a military  withdrawal over a complex political  settlement that 
preserves some of the social, political, and humanitarian gains made since 2001. The U.S.-Taliban agreement 
envisioned intra-Afghan talks beginning on March 10, 2020, but talks remain unscheduled amid a number of 
obstacles, including: 

  Heightened  Taliban violence. While  the Taliban  have refrained from attacks on U.S. personnel 

since February 29, they have escalated their attacks on Afghan forces. 

  Disputes over an ongoing prisoner exchange. As of late April,  each side has released dozens of 

prisoners, though not at levels envisioned by the U.S.-Taliban agreement.  

  Political  crisis in Afghanistan. President Ashraf Ghani was declared the winner of the September 
2019 presidential  election on February 18, 2020, but his chief rival (and former partner in a unity 
government) Abdullah Abdullah  rejects the result as fraudulent and has sought to establish 
himself at the head of an alternate government. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, after an attempt 
to mediate the dispute in  March 2020, announced the “immediate” suspension of $1 billion in 
U.S. assistance to the Afghan government due to the continued impasse.  

  COVID-19, which further complicates many of the dynamics above. Afghanistan, one of the 
poorest countries in the world, may be at particular risk due to a public health system and 
infrastructure undermined by decades of war and poor governance.  

Observers speculate about what kind of political arrangement, if any, could satisfy both Kabul and the Taliban to 
the extent that the latter fully  abandons armed struggle. In any event, it remains unclear to what extent the U.S. 
withdrawal is contingent upon the Taliban holding talks with Kabul  or the outcome of such talks. For now, the 
Taliban have maintained their refusal to engage with the Afghan government’s negotiating team.  

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

A  full-scale U.S. withdrawal and/or aid cutoff could lead to the collapse of the Afghan government and perhaps 
even the reestablishment of Taliban control. By many measures, the Taliban are in a stronger military position 
now than at any point since 2001, though many once-public metrics related to the conduct of the war have been 
classified or are no longer produced. For additional information on Afghanistan and U.S. policy there, see CRS 
Report R45818, Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy, by Clayton Thomas. For background information and 
analysis on the history of congressional engagement with Afghanistan and U.S. policy there, as well as a summary 
of recent Afghanistan-related legislative  proposals, see CRS Report R45329, Afghanistan: Issues for Congress 
and Legislation 2017-2019, by Clayton Thomas. 

Congressional Research Service 

 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Contents 

Overview ....................................................................................................................... 1 
U.S.-Taliban Agreement ................................................................................................... 2 
Background: U.S.-Taliban Negotiations ........................................................................ 2 
Prelude: Reduction in Violence (RiV) ........................................................................... 2 
U.S.-Taliban Agreement ............................................................................................. 3 
Intra-Afghan Talks and Obstacles................................................................................. 3 
Prisoner Exchange ................................................................................................ 4 
Renewed Violence ................................................................................................ 5 
Political Crisis and U.S. Aid Suspension .................................................................. 5 
COVID-19 Pandemic............................................................................................ 6 
Military and Security Situation.......................................................................................... 7 
U.S. Adversaries: The Taliban and Islamic State ............................................................. 8 
ANDSF Development and Deployment......................................................................... 9 
Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors ............................................................ 10 
Economy and U.S. Aid................................................................................................... 11 
Outlook ....................................................................................................................... 12 

Figures 

Figure 1. Number of Weapons Released (Manned and Remotely Piloted Aircraft strike 

assets) by year ............................................................................................................. 8 

Appendixes 

Appendix. U.S. Strikes, July 2019-February 2020 .............................................................. 15 

Contacts 

Author Contact Information ............................................................................................ 16 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Overview 
On February 29, 2020, after more than a year of talks between U.S. and Taliban negotiators, the 
two sides concluded an agreement laying the groundwork for the withdrawal of U.S. armed forces 
from Afghanistan.  

As part of the agreement, the United States is to draw down its forces from 13,000 to 8,600 
within 135 days (with proportionate decreases in allied force levels) and withdraw all of its forces 
within 14 months. That withdrawal is under way as of May 2020. Other U.S. commitments 
include working to facilitate a prisoner exchange between the Taliban and the Afghan government 
and removing U.S. sanctions on Taliban members by August 27, 2020. In exchange, the Taliban 
committed to not allow Taliban  members or other groups, including Al Qaeda, to use Afghan soil 
to threaten the United  States or its allies, including  by preventing recruiting, training, and 
fundraising for such activities. The agreement was preceded by a week-long ceasefire, but 
violence between the Taliban and Afghan government forces has escalated significantly since 
February 29.  

The agreement also says the Taliban “will  start intra-Afghan negotiations” on March 10, 2020; as 
of May 2020, such talks have not been scheduled or held, despite some tentative progress. 
Prospective intra-Afghan talks are complicated by several obstacles, including: 

  Continued Taliban  violence. 
  A  dispute over a potential  prisoner exchange between the Taliban and Afghan 

government. 

  A  political  crisis stemming from the disputed results of the October 2019 

presidential  election. 
  The COVID-19 pandemic. 

It remains unclear to what extent the U.S. withdrawal is contingent upon, or otherwise related to, 
the Taliban holding  talks with Kabul  or the outcome of such talks. The Taliban have thus far 
refused to meet with the Afghan government’s negotiating team.  

The U.S.-Taliban agreement comes after a violent year in Afghanistan: the United Nations reports 
that over 10,000 civilians were killed  or injured in  fighting in  2019, down slightly from 2018. The 
conflict also involves an array of other armed groups, including active affiliates of both Al  Qaeda 
(AQ) and the Islamic State (IS, also known as ISIS, ISIL, or Da’esh). U.S. operations intensified 
in 2019, by some measures: the United States dropped more munitions in Afghanistan in 2019 
than any other year since at least 2010 and U.S. forces conducted strikes in 27 of Afghanistan’s 
34 provinces in the first two months of 2020 alone.1 By some measures, the Taliban are in control 
of or contesting more territory today than at any point since 2001, though many once-public 
conflict metrics are now withheld by the U.S. military. 

The United  States has appropriated approximately $137 billion  in various forms of reconstruction 
aid to Afghanistan over the past 18 years, from building up and sustaining the Afghan National 
Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF) to economic development. This assistance has increased 
Afghan government capacity, but prospects for stability in Afghanistan appear distant. 
Afghanistan’s largely underdeveloped natural resources and/or geographic position at the 
crossroads of future global trade routes could improve the economic life of the country, and, by 
extension, its social and political  dynamics. Nevertheless, Afghanistan’s economic and political 

1 CRS  analysis of U.S.  Forces-Afghanistan monthly strike summaries. 

Congressional Research Service  

1 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

outlook remains uncertain, if not negative, in light  of ongoing hostilities  and the prospective 
decrease in U.S. and international  investment and engagement.  

U.S.-Taliban Agreement 
On February 29, 2020, after more than a year of official negotiations between U.S. and Taliban 
representatives, the two sides concluded an agreement laying the groundwork for the withdrawal 
of U.S. armed forces from Afghanistan, and for talks between Kabul and the Taliban. Subsequent 
developments, including a number of obstacles to potential Taliban-Afghan government talks, 
have raised questions about the agreement and broader U.S. policy in Afghanistan going forward.  

Background: U.S.-Taliban Negotiations 
In President Donald Trump’s August 2017 speech laying out a revised strategy for Afghanistan, 
he referred to a “political  settlement” as an outcome of an “effective military effort,” but did not 
elaborate on what U.S. goals or conditions might be as part of this putative political  process. Less 
than one year later, the Trump Administration decided to enter into direct negotiations with the 
Taliban, without the participation of Afghan government representatives. With little  to no 
progress on the battlefield, the Trump Administration reversed the long-standing U.S. position 
prioritizing  an “Afghan-led, Afghan-owned reconciliation process,” and the first high-level, direct 
U.S.-Taliban talks occurred in Doha, Qatar, in July 2018. 2 The September 2018 appointment of 
Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad,  the Afghan-born former U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan, as 
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation  added momentum to this effort. 

For almost a year, Khalilzad  held a near-continuous series of meetings with Taliban officials in 
Doha, along with consultations with the Afghan, Pakistani, and other regional governments. In 
March 2019, Khalilzad  announced that an agreement “in draft” had been reached on 
counterterrorism assurances and U.S. troop withdrawal. He stated that after the agreement was 
finalized,  “the Taliban  and other Afghans, including the government, will begin intra-Afghan 
negotiations on a political  settlement and comprehensive ceasefire.”3 The process appeared to be 
reaching its conclusion in September 2019, when President Trump called off talks after a Taliban 
attack killed  a U.S. soldier. U.S.-Taliban negotiations resumed about three months later. 

Prelude: Reduction in Violence (RiV) 
On February 14, 2020, a senior U.S. official revealed that U.S. and Taliban negotiators had 
reached a “very specific” agreement to reduce violence across the country, including attacks 
against Afghan forces, after which, if U.S. military commanders assessed that the truce held, the 
United  States and Taliban would sign a formal agreement.4 U.S. officials called the reduction in 
violence (sometimes referred to as “RiV”) a test of the Taliban’s intentions and of the group’s 
control over its forces, given the possibility for spoilers to upend the negotiation process.  

The reduction in violence went into effect on February 22, 2020. U.S. commander General Scott 
Miller  said that he was “satisfied that the Taliban made a good-faith effort,” describing episodes 

2 See,  for example, Department of Defense, “Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan,” June 2017.  
3 U.S.  Special  Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, T witter, March 12, 2019.  
4 Conor Finnegan and Aleem Agha, “ US, T aliban reach agreement to reduce violence, opening door to troop 
withdrawal  deal,”  ABC  News,  February 14, 2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

2 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

of violence as “sporadic.”5 According to U.S. and Afghan officials, attacks were down 
significantly across the country, by as much as 80 percent.6  

U.S.-Taliban Agreement 
After the weeklong reduction in violence, Special Representative Khalilzad  signed the formal 
U.S.-Taliban agreement with Taliban deputy political  leader Mullah Abdul  Ghani Baradar on 
February 29, 2020, in front of a number of international observers, including Secretary of State 
Pompeo, in Doha. On the same day in Kabul,  Secretary of Defense Mark Esper met with Afghan 
President Ashraf Ghani to issue a joint  U.S.-Afghan declaration reaffirming U.S. support for the 
Afghan government and reiterating the Afghan government’s longstanding willingness to 
negotiate with the Taliban without preconditions.  

As part of the U.S.-Taliban agreement, which is about three and a half pages, the United  States 
agreed to draw down its forces from 13,000 to 8,600 within 135 days (with proportionate 
decreases in allied  force levels) and withdraw all of its forces within 14 months. Other U.S. 
commitments included working to facilitate a prisoner exchange between the Taliban and the 
Afghan government (more below) and removing U.S. sanctions on Taliban members by August 
27, 2020. The sanctions removal is contingent upon the start of intra-Afghan negotiations. In 
exchange, the Taliban committed to not allow members or other groups, including Al Qaeda, to 
use Afghan soil to threaten the U.S. or its allies,  including  by preventing recruiting, training, and 
fundraising.  

U.S. officials said that “there are parts of this agreement that aren’t going to be public, but those 
parts don’t contain any additional commitments by the United States whatsoever,” describing the 
annexes as “confidential procedures for implementation and verification.”7 Secretary Pompeo 
said “every member of Congress will get a chance to see them,” though some Members raised 
questions about the necessity of classifying these annexes. 8 

Intra-Afghan Talks and Obstacles 
The U.S.-Taliban agreement envisions the end of the U.S. military  effort in Afghanistan, but it 
does not represent a comprehensive peace agreement, which most observers assess is only 
possible through a negotiated political  settlement between the Taliban and the Afghan 
government. The agreement states that the Taliban “will start intra-Afghan negotiations” on 
March 10, 2020, but no talks have been scheduled or held to date. It is unclear to what extent the 
U.S. withdrawal is contingent upon, or otherwise related to, the Taliban holding talks with Kabul 
or the outcome of such talks.9 Deputy U.S. negotiator Molly Phee said on February 18, “We will 
not prejudge the outcome of intra-Afghan negotiations, but we are prepared to support whatever 

5 Dan Lamothe, “ Inside the U.S. military’s historic week in Afghanistan ahead of a peace deal  with the T aliban,” 
Washington Post, February  28, 2020.  
6 Mujib  Mashal, “ Scarred and Weary, an Afghan Force Wonders: What is Peace?” New  York Times, February 27, 2020. 
7 Kim Dozier, “Secret Annexes, Backroom Deals: Can Zalmay Khalilzad  Deliver Afghan Peace for T rump?” Time, 
February 15, 2020; Briefing with Senior Administration Officials, op. cit. 
8 Juliegrace  Brufke, “ House Republicans  sound  the alarm on T aliban deal,” The Hill, March 3, 2020. 
9 In a February 27 briefing  ahead of the agreement signing, one unnamed senior U.S.  official said,  “if the political 
settlement fails, if the talks fail, there is nothing that obliges the United States to withdraw  troops,” while another said,  
“the withdrawal timeline is related to counterterrorism, not political outcomes.” Briefing with  Senior Administration 
Officials on Next Steps T oward an Agreement on Bringing  Peace to Afghanistan, February 29, 2020.  

Congressional Research Service  

3 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

consensus the Afghans are able to reach about their future political and governing 
arrangements.”10 

It remains unclear what kind of political  arrangement could satisfy both Kabul and the Taliban to 
the extent that the latter abandons its armed struggle. Afghan President Ghani has promised that 
his government will not accept any settlement that limits Afghans’ rights and has warned that any 
agreement to withdraw U.S. forces that did not include Kabul’s participation could lead to 
“catastrophe,” pointing to the 1990s-era civil strife following the fall of the Soviet-backed 
government that led to the rise of the Taliban.11 Afghans opposed to the Taliban doubt the group’s 
trustworthiness, and express concern that, in the absence of U.S. military pressure, the group will 
have little  incentive to comply with the terms of an agreement, the most crucial aspect of which 
would arguably be concluding a comprehensive political settlement with the Afghan 
government.12  

The Taliban have given contradictory signs, and generally do not describe in detail  their vision for 
post-settlement Afghan governance beyond referring to it as a subject for intra-Afghan 
negotiations.13 Many Afghans, especially women, who remember Taliban rule and oppose the 
group’s policies and beliefs remain wary.14 Still, a December 2019 survey reported that a 
“significant majority” of Afghans are both aware of (77%) and strongly or somewhat support 
(89%) efforts to negotiate a peace agreement with the Taliban, while opposing the group itself.15  

In the months since the U.S.-Taliban agreement, one nascent indicator of progress has been the 
Afghan government’s formation of a 21-member negotiating team, which was announced on 
March 26, 2020. The group, which includes five women, has been endorsed by the United States 
and, perhaps more significantly, by figures from across the Afghan political spectrum, including 
Abdullah  and other Ghani opponents. Still, the Taliban rejected that team and have maintained 
their refusal to negotiate with Kabul.  Potential talks also are complicated and undermined by a 
number of issues, outlined below. 

Prisoner Exchange 

A  planned prisoner exchange has emerged as the most immediate obstacle to the intra-Afghan 
talks seen as necessary to resolve the war in Afghanistan. Some experts point out that “the United 
States [used] different language in separate documents it agreed with the Taliban and the Afghan 
government.”16 Specifically, the U.S.-Taliban agreement reads that “up to” 5,000 Taliban 
prisoners and 1,000 Afghan forces held by the Taliban “will  be released by March 10, 2020,” 
while the U.S.-Afghan government joint declaration states that the Afghan government “will 

10 Molly Phee, remarks at “ Ending Our Endless  War in Afghanistan,” United States Institute of Peace, February 18, 
2020. 
11 “Afghans Worry as US  Makes Progress in T aliban T alks,” Voice of America, January 29, 2019. 
12 “Afghans voice fears that the U.S. is undercutting them in deal with the T aliban,” Washington Post, August  17, 2019. 
13 Middle  East Media  Research Institute, “Afghan T aliban Spokesman Suhail Shaheen On Failed  U.S.-T aliban T alks,” 
September 19, 2019. See also Frud  Bezhan, “T aliban Constitution Offers Glimpe into Gropu’s Vision  for Afghanistan,” 
RFE/RL,  April 27, 2020   
14 Pamela Constable, “ T he Return of a T aliban Government? Afghanistan T alks Raise Once-Unthinkable Question,” 
Washington Post, January 29, 2019. 
15 T he Asia Foundation, “Afghanistan in 2019: A Survey of the Afghan People,” released December 3, 2019.  
16 Frud  Bezhan, “ T he Historic U.S.-T aliban Deal May Already Be Unraveling Over T hese T wo Key Issues,”  RFE/RL, 
March 3, 2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

4 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

participate in  a U.S.-facilitated discussion” with the Taliban on “the feasibility  of releasing 
significant numbers of prisoners on both sides.”  

President Ghani signed a decree on March 11, 2020, that would release 1,500 prisoners within 15 
days as long as they provide written assurances to remain off the battlefield, with further releases 
of 500 prisoners every two weeks as long as the Taliban engage in talks and reduce violence.17 A 
Taliban spokesman rejected any conditions-based prisoner release as “against the peace accord 
that we signed” and insisted that 5,000 prisoners be released before any intra-Afghan talks.18 
Despite the Taliban  not having evidently met the Afghan government’s conditions, some limited 
releases have taken place: as of May 2020, the Afghan government has released several hundred 
Taliban prisoners, and the Taliban have in turn released several dozen Afghan personnel.  

Renew ed Violence 

Another potential  barrier to intra-Afghan talks is the resumption and escalation of nationwide 
violence. While  the Taliban  refrained from attacking Afghan forces during the weeklong 
reduction in violence  preceding the agreement, they resumed operations immediately after the 
agreement, and violence has now reached levels comparable to prior months.  

U.S. military  officials have given differing interpretations of Taliban attacks. Secretary of 
Defense Esper said in a March 2 media availability  that “our expectation is that the reduction in 
violence will  continue, it [will] taper off until we get intra-Afghan negotiations.”19 It is not clear 
what the basis for that “expectation” is; there is no provision in  the U.S.-Taliban agreement 
committing the Taliban to continue to refrain from attacking Afghan forces. CENTCOM 
Commander General Frank McKenzie  said on March 10 that “Taliban attacks are higher than we 
believe  are consistent with an idea to actually carry out” the U.S.-Taliban agreement.20 Since 
then, U.S. officials maintain that Taliban  violence is “unacceptably high,” while violence has 
increased: according to Afghan officials, an average of 25 to 40 Afghan security personnel were 
killed  every day in mid-April.21 

Political Crisis and U.S. Aid Suspension 

Further potentially complicating the situation is the February 18, 2020, announcement of 
President Ghani’s victory in the September 2019 presidential election over former Chief 
Executive Officer Abdullah Abdullah.  Abdullah  and his supporters rejected the narrow result as 
fraudulent and have sought to establish themselves as a separate government.22 Despite Special 
Representative Khalilzad’s  attempts to mediate, Ghani and Abdullah  held separate inauguration 
ceremonies on March 9, 2020. It is unclear what kind of governing arrangement could satisfy 
Abdullah  and his supporters, who argue that Ghani did not uphold the previous power-sharing 

17 Hamid Shalizi,  “Exclusive: Afghan government to release 1,500 T aliban prisoners from jails-decree,” Reuters, 
March 10, 2020.  
18 “Afghan government to free 1,500 prisoners; T aliban demands 5,000,” Reuter s, March 11, 2020.  
19 Defense Secretary Esper and Joint Chiefs of Staff Milley Hold Media  Availability, March 2, 2020.  
20 Morgan Phillips, “ US Commander disappointed with T aliban peace efforts: Violence ‘higher’ than agreement 
allows,”  Fox News,  March 10, 2020. 
21 “Ambassador Kay Bailey  Hutchison on NAT O’s Statement on Afghanistan,” U.S. Mission to the North Atlantic 
T reaty Organization, April 24, 2020; Mujib Mashal, “T aliban Ramp Up Attacks Even as Coronavirus Spreads  in 
Afghanistan,” New York Times, April 24, 2020. 
22 “Abdullah Rejects Results,  Announces Formation of ‘Inclusive Govt,’” TOLO News,  February 18, 2020.  

Congressional Research Service  

5 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

agreement. Some critics describe Afghanistan’s current political system as overly centralized, 
arguing that it discourages compromise and fans ethnic tensions.23  

On March 23, Secretary Pompeo made an unannounced visit to Kabul, where he met with Ghani 
and Abdullah  individually  and together. However, Pompeo was unable to secure an agreement, 
and the two sides remain at odds. On his return to the United States, Pompeo released a statement 
criticizing the two men for their inability  to come to an agreement: 

The United States is disappointed in them and what their conduct means for Afghanistan 
and our  shared interests. Their failure  has harmed U.S.-Afghan relations and, sadly, 
dishonors those Afghan, Americans, and Coalition partners who have sacrificed their lives 
and treasure in the struggle to build a new future for this country. Because this leadership 
failure  poses a direct threat to U.S.  national interests, effective immediately, the U.S. 
government will initiate a review of the scope of our cooperation with Afghanistan.24  

Among other measures, the statement announced an “immediate” suspension of $1 billion  in U.S. 
assistance in 2020, with a further $1 billion  cut in 2021. It is unclear which U.S. funds are 
potentially  impacted by the announcement; according to an April 2020 Reuters report, citing U.S. 
officials, it is likely  to come from assistance to Afghan security forces.25 However, Pompeo added 
that the United  States might “revisit” the announced aid reductions if Afghan leaders were to 
come to an agreement. Abdullah  reported progress on May 1, 2020, saying the two sides had 
“reached tentative agreement on a range of principles.”26 

COVID-19 Pandemic 

Overshadowing all of the developments above is the continued spread of COVID-19 in 
Afghanistan, which reported over 2,300 cases as of May 1, 2020, though that figure likely 
understates the scale of the virus in Afghanistan due to extremely limited  testing. 27 COVID-19 
has impacted a number of dynamics related to the U.S.-Taliban agreement and potential  intra-
Afghan talks. Most notably, the United  States announced on March 18 that it is pausing the 
movement of personnel into and out of theater due to concerns about COVID-19, leading some to 
question whether withdrawal plans will take place as envisioned by the agreement. 28 On the other 
hand, NBC News reported in April  2020 that President Trump has advocated accelerating the 
withdrawal of all U.S. troops out of Afghanistan because of the pandemic.29  

Further spread of COVID-19 in Afghanistan could cause additional  disruptions to the nascent 
peace process, or could present opportunities for compromise and intra-Afghan cooperation. For 
example, while the Taliban  have reportedly targeted health workers in the past, a Taliban 
spokesman announced that the group “assures all international  health organizations and WHO of 

23 See,  for example, Ahmad Massoud,  “What Is Missing From Afghan Peace T alks,” New  York Times, April 14, 2020. 
24 Secretary of State Michael Pompeo, “On the Political Impasse in Afghanistan,” State Department, March 23, 2020.  
25 Jonathan Landay, Arshad Mohammed, and Idrees  Ali, “Exclusive: Planned $1 billion U.S.  aid  cut would  hit afghan 
security force funds,”  Reuters, April 5, 2020.  
26 “Abdullah reports progress in political negotiations,” Tolo News, May 1, 2020. 
27 Belquis  Ahmadi and Palwasha Kakar, “Coronavirus in Afghanistan: An Opportunity to Build T rust with the 
T aliban?” United States Institute of Peace, April 16, 2020. 
28 T homas Gibbons-Neff and Julian  Barnes, “ Coronavirus Disrupts T roop Withdrawal in Afghanist an,” New York 
Times, March 18, 2020. 
29 Carol E. Lee and Courtney Kube,  “ T rump tells advisors U.S.  should pull  troops as Afghanistan COVID -19 outbreak 
looms,” NBC  News,  April 27, 2020.  

Congressional Research Service  

6 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

its readiness to cooperate and coordinate with them in combatting” COVID-19.30 Afghanistan 
may be at particularly high risk of a widespread outbreak, due in part to its weak public health 
infrastructure and its porous border with Iran, a regional epicenter of the pandemic where up to 
three million  Afghan refugees live:  over 250,000 Afghans have returned from Iran since January 
1, 2020.31 

Military and Security Situation  
As of May 2020, there are approximately 12,000 U.S. forces in Afghanistan. 8,000 of these are 
part of the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan of 16,000 troops, known as Resolute Support 
Mission (RSM). RSM has trained, advised, and assisted Afghan government forces since its 
inception in early 2015, when Afghan forces assumed responsibility for security nationwide. 
Combat operations by U.S. forces also continue and have increased in number since 2017. These 
two “complementary missions” comprise Operation Freedom’s Sentinel.32 As mentioned above, 
the United  States has committed to withdrawing about a third of U.S. forces by mid-July and all 
troops within 14 months, with commensurate drawdowns in international forces (NATO and 
partner country forces plan to reduce their presence from 16,000 to 12,000 by mid-July 2020). 

President Trump’s determination to withdraw U.S. forces reportedly stems at least in part from 
frustration with the state of the conflict, which U.S. military officials have assessed as a “strategic 
stalemate” since at least early 2017.33 Arguably complicating that assessment, the U.S. 
government has withheld many once-public metrics of military progress. Notably, SIGAR 
reported in April  2019 that the U.S. military  is “no longer producing its district-level stability 
assessments of Afghan government and insurgent control and influence” because it “was of 
limited  decision-making value  to the [U.S.] Commander.”34 The last reported metrics from 
SIGAR in its January 30, 2019, report, showed that the share of districts under government 
control or influence fell  to 53.8%, as of October 2018. This figure was the lowest recorded by 
SIGAR since tracking began in November 2015; 12% of districts were under insurgent control or 
influence, with the remaining 34% contested.  

At the same time, U.S. air operations have escalated considerably under the Trump 
Administration, as measured by the number of munitions released; the U.S. dropped more 
munitions in Afghanistan in  2019 than any other year since at least 2010 (see Figure 1). These 
operations contributed to a sharp rise in civilian  casualties; the U.N. reported that the third quarter 
of 2019 saw the highest quarterly civilian  casualty toll since tracking began in 2009, with over 
4,300 civilians killed  or injured from July 1 to September 30, though 2019 overall saw a slight 

30 Abdul  Qadir Sediqi  and Orooj Hakimi, “Coronavirus makes T aliban realise  they need health workers alive not dead,” 
Reuters, March 18, 2020.  
31 International Organization on Migration, Return of Undocumented Afghans Weekly Situation Report, April 12 -18, 
2020. See also, Jaffer Shah, et al., “COVID-19: the current situation in Afghanistan,” The Lancet, April 2, 2020. 
32 Lead Inspector General for Overseas Contingency Operations, Operation Freedom’s Sentinel, Quarterly Report to 
Congress, July 1 to September 30, 2018, November 19, 2018. 
33 Department of Defense Press Briefing by  Secretary Esper and General  Milley in the Pentagon Briefing Room, 
December 20, 2019. 
34 SIGAR,  Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2019. T his information, which was  in every 
previous Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction (SIGAR) quarterly report going back to January 
2016, estimated the extent of T aliban control and influence in terms of both territory and population.  

Congressional Research Service  

7 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

decrease in civilian  casualties.35 In the first two months of 2020 alone, U.S. forces conducted 
1,010 strikes in 27 of Afghanistan’s 34 provinces (see Appendix).36 

Figure 1. Number of Weapons Released (Manned and Remotely Piloted Aircraft 
strike assets) by year 

Source: Combined Forces  Air Component Commander  2013-2019 Airpower Statistics. 

U.S. Adversaries: The Taliban and Islamic State 
The leader of the Taliban is Haibatullah  Akhundzada, who is known as emir al-mu’minin, or 
commander of the faithful; the Taliban style themselves as the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. 
Haibatullah  succeeded Mullah Mansoor, who was killed in a 2016 U.S. airstrike in Pakistan; 
Mansoor had succeeded Taliban founder Mullah Omar, who died of natural causes in April  2013. 
Formerly a figure in Taliban  religious courts, Haibatullah is generally  regarded as “more of an 
Islamic scholar than a military  tactician.”37 Still, under his leadership the Taliban  have achieved 
some notable military  successes and the group is seen as more cohesive and less susceptible to 
fragmentation than in the past.38 There are an estimated 60,000 full-time Taliban fighters. 

The Taliban retain the ability  to conduct high-profile urban attacks while also demonstrating 
considerable tactical capabilities.  However, SIGAR reported in April  2020 that U.S. forces are 
now withholding from public release data on enemy-initiated  attacks, which SIGAR called “one 
of the last remaining metrics SIGAR was able to use to report publicly on the security situation in 
Afghanistan.”39 Insider attacks on U.S. and coalition forces by Afghan nationals are a sporadic, 
but persistent, problem.  

35 United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Annual Report on the Protection of Civilians  in 
Armed Conflict: 2019, February 2020. T hough the majority of civilian casualties are attributed to anti-government 
forces, the U.N. reported in October that civilian casualties from air operations (885 killed or injured)  set a record in the  
first nine months of 2019, with 74% of those casualties resulting from operations by international forces.  
36 U.S.  Forces-Afghanistan, September 2019 Strike Summary, October 27, 2019. 
37 “Red on Red:  Analyzing Afghanistan’s Intra-Insurgency Violence,” CTC  Sentinel, vol. 11, iss. 1, January 2018. 
38 Andrew  Watkins, “ T aliban Fragmentation: A Figment of Your Imagination?” War on the Rocks, September 4, 2019. 
39 SIGAR,  Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2020. SIGAR  reports that the U.S. military 
“explained its decision by saying  ‘EIA are now  a critical part of deliberative interagency discussions  regarding  ongoing 
political negotiations between the U.S. and the T aliban.’” 

Congressional Research Service  

8 

 
 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Beyond the Taliban, a significant share of U.S. operations have been aimed at the local  Islamic 
State affiliate, known as Islamic State-Khorasan Province (ISKP, also known as ISIS-K). 
Estimates of ISKP strength generally ranged from 2,000 to 4,000 fighters until ISKP “collapsed” 
in late 2019 due to offensives by U.S. and Afghan forces and, separately, the Taliban.40 ISKP and 
Taliban forces have sometimes fought over control of territory or because of political or other 
differences.41 Some U.S. officials have stated that ISKP aspires to conduct attacks in the West, 
though there is reportedly disagreement within the U.S. government about the nature of the 
threat.42 ISKP also has claimed responsibility  for a number of large-scale attacks, many targeting 
Afghanistan’s Shia minority. Some have raised the prospect of Taliban hardliners defecting to 
ISKP in the event that Taliban  leaders agree to a political  settlement or to a continued U.S. 
counterterrorism presence.43 The United Nations reported in January 2020 that Al  Qaeda leaders 
were “concerned” by U.S.-Taliban talks, but that relations between Al Qaeda and the Taliban 
“continue to be close and mutually  beneficial, with [Al Qaeda] supplying resources and training 
in exchange for protection.”44 

ANDSF Development and Deployment  
The effectiveness of the ANDSF is key to the security of Afghanistan. Congress appropriated at 
least $86.4 billion  for Afghan security assistance between FY2002 and FY2019, according to 
SIGAR.45 Since 2014, the United  States generally has provided around 75% of the estimated $5 
billion  to $6 billion  a year required to fund the ANDSF, with the balance coming from U.S. 
partners ($1 billion  annually) and the Afghan government ($500 million). 

Concerns about the ANDSF raised by SIGAR, the Department of Defense, and others include 
absenteeism, the fact that about 35% of the force does not reenlist each year, and the potential for 
rapid recruitment to dilute the force’s quality; widespread illiteracy within the force; credible 
allegations  of child sexual abuse and other potential  human rights abuses;46 and casualty rates 
often described as unsustainable. 

Total ANDSF strength was reported at 281,000 as of January 2020, up about 9,000 from the 
previous quarter. The U.S. military attributed the increase to changes in enrollment verification 
processes.47 Other metrics related to ANDSF performance, including casualty and attrition rates, 
have been classified by U.S. Forces-Afghanistan (USFOR-A) starting with the October 2017 
SIGAR quarterly report, citing a request from the Afghan government, although SIGAR had 
previously published those metrics as part of its quarterly reports.48 In both legislation and public 

40 “ISIS  Is Losing Afghan T erritory. That Means Little for Its Victims,” New York Times, December 2, 2019. 
41 See,  for example, “ Heavy fighting flares between T aliban, Islamic State in Afghanistan,” Reuters, April 24, 2019;  
Shawn  Snow,  “ ISIS  loses more than half its fighters from US  airstrikes and T aliban ground  operations,” Military 
Times, February 27, 2020. 
42 T homas Gibbons-Neff and Julian  Barnes, “ U.S. Military Calls ISIS  in Afghanistan a T hreat to the West. Intelligence 
Officials Disagree,”  New  York Times, August  2, 2019. 
43 David Ignatius, “ Uncertainty Clouds the Path Forward in  Afghanistan.” Washington Post, July  22, 2019. 
44 T wenty-fifth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring T eam submitted pursuant to resolution 2368 
(2017) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida  and associated individuals  and entities, S/2020/53, January 20, 2020. 
45 SIGAR,  Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2020. 
46 See  SIGAR  Report 17-47, Child Sexual Assault in Afghanistan: Implementation of the Leahy Laws and Reports of 
Assault by Afghan Security Forces, June  2017 (released on January 23, 2018). 
47 SIGAR,  Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2020. 
48 “ Report: US Officials Classify Crucial  Metrics on Afghan Casualties,  Readiness,”  Military  Times, October 30, 2017. 

Congressional Research Service  

9 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

statements, some Members of Congress have expressed concern over the decline in the types and 
amount of information made public by the executive branch.  

Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors 
Regional  dynamics, and the involvement of outside powers, are central to the conflict in 
Afghanistan. The neighboring state widely considered most important in this regard is Pakistan, 
which has played an active, and by many accounts negative, role in Afghan affairs for decades. 
Pakistan’s security services maintain ties to Afghan insurgent groups, most notably the Haqqani 
Network.49 Afghan leaders, along with U.S. military commanders, attribute much of the 
insurgency’s power and longevity either directly or indirectly to Pakistani support; President 
Trump has accused Pakistan of “housing the very terrorists that we are fighting.”50 U.S. officials 
have long identified  militant  safe havens in Pakistan as a threat to security in Afghanistan, though 
some Pakistani officials dispute that charge and note the Taliban’s increased territorial control 
within Afghanistan itself.51 

Pakistan may view a weak and destabilized Afghanistan as preferable to a strong, unified Afghan 
state (particularly one led  by an ethnic Pashtun-dominated government in Kabul; Pakistan has a 
large and restive Pashtun minority).52 However, instability in Afghanistan could rebound to 
Pakistan’s detriment; Pakistan has struggled with indigenous Islamist militants of its own. 
Afghanistan-Pakistan relations are further complicated by the presence of over a million Afghan 
refugees in Pakistan, as well as a long-running and ethnically tinged dispute over their shared 
1,600-mile border.53 Pakistan’s security establishment, fearful of strategic encirclement by India, 
apparently continues to view the Afghan Taliban as a relatively  friendly and reliably  anti-India 
element in Afghanistan. India’s diplomatic and commercial presence in Afghanistan—and U.S. 
rhetorical support for it—exacerbates Pakistani fears of encirclement. Indian interest in 
Afghanistan stems largely from India’s broader regional rivalry with Pakistan, which impedes 
Indian efforts to establish stronger and more direct commercial and political  relations with 
Central Asia. India has been the largest regional  contributor to Afghan reconstruction, but New 
Delhi  has not shown an inclination to pursue a deeper defense relationship with Kabul. 

Since late 2018, the Trump Administration has sought Islamabad’s assistance in U.S. talks with 
the Taliban. One important action taken by Pakistan was the October 2018 release of Taliban co-
founder Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar, who was captured in Karachi in a joint U.S.-Pakistani 
operation in 2010. Khalilzad  said in February 2019 that Baradar’s release “was my request,” and 

49 For more, see CRS  In Focus  IF10604, Al Qaeda and Islamic State Affiliates in Afghanistan , by Clayton T homas.  
50 White House, Remarks by President Trump on the Strategy in Afghanistan and South Asia , August  21, 2017. 
51 Author interviews with Pakistani military officials, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, February 21, 2018.  
52 Pashtuns are an ethnic group that makes up about 40% of Afghanistan’s 35 million people and 15% of Pakistan’s 215 
million; they thus represent a plurality in Afghanistan but are a relatively small minority among many others in 
Pakistan, though Pakistan’s Pashtun population is considerably larger than Afghanistan’s. Pakistan condemns as 
interference statements by President Ashraf Ghani (who is  Pashtun) and other Afghan leaders about an ongoing protest 
campaign by Pakistani Pashtuns for greater civil and political rights. “Pakistan cautions Afghan president against 
‘interfering’ in internal matters,” Express Tribune, January 27, 2020.  
53 About 2 million Afghan refugees  have returned from Pakistan since the T aliban fell in 2011, but 1.4 million 
registered refugees  remain in Pakistan, according to the United Nations, along with perhaps as many as 1 million 
unregistered refugees.  Many of these refugees  are Pashtuns (see Amnesty International, Afghanistan’s Refugees: Forty 
Years of Dispossession, June  20, 2019). Pakistan, the United Nations, and others recognize the Durand Line as  an 
international boundary, but Afghanistan does not. 

Congressional Research Service  

10 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

later thanked Pakistan for facilitating the travel of Taliban figures to talks in Doha. 54 Baradar went 
on to sign the U.S.-Taliban agreement alongside Khalilzad.  A biannual  Department of Defense 
report on Afghanistan released in January 2020 asserted that “Pakistan is supporting the Afghan 
reconciliation,” describing Pakistan’s role as “constructive but limited.”55  

Afghanistan largely maintains cordial ties with its other neighbors, notably the post-Soviet states 
of Central Asia, whose role in Afghanistan has been relatively  limited  but could increase.56 In the 
past two years, multiple U.S. commanders have warned of increased levels of assistance, and 
perhaps even material support, for the Taliban from Russia and Iran, both of which cite IS 
presence in Afghanistan to justify their activities.57 Both  nations were opposed to the Taliban 
government of the late 1990s, but reportedly see the Taliban as a useful point of leverage vis -a-vis 
the United  States. Afghanistan may also represent a growing priority for China in  the context of 
broader Chinese aspirations in Asia and globally. 58   

Economy and U.S. Aid 
Economic development is pivotal  to Afghanistan’s long-term stability, though indicators of future 
growth are mixed. Decades of war have stunted the development of most domestic industries, 
including mining.59 The economy has also been hurt by decreases in aid provided by international 
donors. Afghanistan’s gross domestic product (GDP) has grown an average of 7% per year since 
2003, but growth rates averaged between 2% and 3% in recent years and may decline further due 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. Social conditions in Afghanistan remain equally  mixed. On issues 
ranging from human trafficking to religious freedom to women’s rights, Afghanistan has, by 
some accounts, made significant progress since 2001, but future prospects in these areas are 
uncertain.  

Congress has appropriated nearly $137 billion  in  aid for Afghanistan since FY2002, with about 
63% for security and 26% for development (with the remainder for civilian operations and 
humanitarian aid).60 The Administration’s FY2021 budget requests $4 billion  for the ANDSF, 
$250 million  in Economic Support Funds, and smaller amounts to help the Afghan government 
with other tasks like counternarcotics.61 These figures represent a decrease from both the FY2020 
request, as well as FY2019 enacted levels. Other than ANDSF funding and other DOD 
contributions, these figures are not included in the cost of U.S. combat operations (including 

54 “Mullah Baradar  released by Pakistan at the behest of US:  Khalilzad,” The Hindu, February 9, 2019. 
55 DOD, Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan , December 2019 (released January 23, 2020). 
56 Humayun Hamidzada  and Richard  Ponzio, Central Asia’s Growing Role in Building Peace and Regional 
Connectivity with Afghanistan, United States Institute of Peace, August 2019. 
57 In October 2018, the T rump Administration sanctioned several Iranian military officials for providing support to the 
T aliban. U.S.  Department of the Treasury, Treasury and the Terrorist  Financing Targeting Center Partners Sanction 
Taliban Facilitators and their Iranian Supporters, October 23, 2018. 
58 See,  for example, Barbara Kelemen, “China’s Economic Stabilization Efforts in Afghanistan: A New  Party to the 
T able?” Middle  East Institute, January 21, 2020. 
59 Much attention has been paid to Afghanistan’s potential mineral and hydrocarbon resources, which by some 
estimates could be  considerable  but have yet to be fully explored or developed. Once estimated at nearly $1 trillion, the 
value of Afghan mineral deposits has since been revised downward,  but those deposits reportedly have attracted 
interest from the T rump Administration. Mark Landler and James Risen, “T rump Finds Reason for the U.S. to Remain 
in Afghanistan: Minerals,” New  York Times, July  25, 2017. Additionally, Afghanistan’s geographic location could 
position it as a transit country for others’ resources.  
60 SIGAR,  Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2020. 
61 For more, see CRS  Report R45329, Afghanistan: Issues for Congress and Legislation 2017 -2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

11 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

related regional support activities), which was estimated at a total of $776 billion  since FY2002 
as of September 2019, according to the DOD’s Cost of War report. In its FY2021 budget request, 
the Pentagon included $14 billion  in direct war costs in Afghanistan (down from the FY2020 
request of $18.6 billion), as well as $32.5 billion  in  “enduring requirements” and $16 billion  in 
Overseas Contingency Operations (OCO) funding for “base requirements;” it is unclear how 
much of the latter two figures is for Afghanistan versus other theaters. 

Outlook 
The February 29, 2020, signing of the U.S.-Taliban agreement represented a significant moment 
for Afghanistan and for U.S. policy there. Still, U.S. officials caution that the agreement was “just 
a first step,” and shifts in political and/or security dynamics may change how various parties 
interpret the agreement and their respective commitments under it.62 In any event, while the U.S.-
Taliban agreement envisions intra-Afghan talks that nearly all  observers describe as essential to 
bringing lasting peace to Afghanistan, concrete progress towards those talks remain elusive. 
Furthermore, the unfolding COVID-19 crisis could impact security and political dynamics in 
Afghanistan, as well as the capacity and/or willingness of the United  States and other 
international  partners to maintain their engagement, both military and financial, with Afghanistan.  

U.S. officials generally  say that the Taliban do not pose an existential  threat to the Afghan 
government, given the current military balance. That dynamic could change if the United States 
alters the level  or nature of its troop deployments in Afghanistan (per the U.S.-Taliban agreement) 
or reduces funding for the ANDSF. President Ghani has said, “[W]e will not be able to support 
our army for six months without U.S. [financial] support.”63 Notwithstanding direct U.S. support, 
Afghan political  dynamics, particularly the willingness of political  actors to directly challenge the 
legitimacy and authority of the central government, even by extralegal means, may pose a serious 
threat to Afghan stability  in 2020 and beyond, regardless of Taliban military  capabilities. 
Increased political instability,  fueled by questions about the central government’s competence, 
continued divisions among Afghan elites, and rising ethnic tensions, may pose as serious a threat 
to Afghanistan’s future as the Taliban does. 

A  potential collapse of the Afghan military  and/or the government that commands it could have 
significant implications  for the United States, particularly given the nature of negotiated security 
arrangements. Regardless of how likely the Taliban  would be to gain full  control over all, or even 
most, of the country, the breakdown of social order and the fracturing of the country into fiefdoms 
controlled by paramilitary  commanders and their respective militias may be plausible,  even 
probable. Afghanistan experienced a similar  situation nearly 30 years ago. Though Soviet troops 
withdrew from Afghanistan by February 1989, Soviet aid continued, sustaining the communist 
government in Kabul  for nearly three years. However, the dissolution of the Soviet Union  in 
December 1991 ended that aid, and a coalition of mujahedin  forces overturned the government in 
April  1992.64 Almost immediately,  mujahedin commanders turned against each other, leading to a 
complex civil  war during which the Taliban was founded, grew, and took control of most of the 
country, eventually offering sanctuary to Al Qaeda. While  the Taliban and Al  Qaeda are still 
closely aligned, Taliban  forces have clashed repeatedly with the Afghan Islamic State affiliate. 

62 Kathryn Wheelbarger, testimony before House Armed Service Committee, March 10, 2020.  
63 Anwar Iqbal,  “ Afghan Army to Collapse in Six  Months Witho ut US Help: Ghani,” Dawn, January 18, 2018. 
64 For more on the mujahedin, see CRS  Report R45818, Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy. 

Congressional Research Service  

12 

 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Under a more unstable future scenario, alliances and relationships among these and other groups 
could evolve, offering new opportunities to transnational terrorist groups. 

The Trump Administration in 2018 described U.S. policy in Afghanistan as “grounded in the 
fundamental objective of preventing any further attacks on the United States by terrorists 
enjoying  safe haven or support in Afghanistan.”65 For years, some analysts have challenged that 
line  of reasoning, describing it as a strategic “myth” and arguing that “the safe haven fallacy is an 
argument for endless war based on unwarranted worst-case scenario assumptions.”66 Some of 
these analysts and others dismiss what they see as a disproportionate focus on the military effort, 
arguing that U.S. policy goals like  countering narcotics and safeguarding human rights are “not 
objectives that the U.S. military…is  well suited to addressing.”67 In any event, U.S. policymakers 
may be inclined to reduce U.S. investments in Afghanistan in  the face of fiscal, political, or other 
constraints brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic.  

Core issues for Congress in Afghanistan include Congress’s role in authorizing, appropriating 
funds for, and overseeing U.S. military activities, aid, and regional policy implementation. 
Additionally,  Members of Congress may examine how the United States can leverage its assets, 
influence, and experience in Afghanistan, as well as those of Afghanistan’s neighbors and 
international  organizations, to encourage more equal, inclusive, and effective governance. 
Congress also could seek to help shape the U.S. approach to talks with the Taliban, or to potential 
negotiations aimed at altering the Afghan political  system, through oversight, legislation, and 
public statements.  

In light  of the U.S.-Taliban agreement, Members of Congress and other U.S. policymakers may 
reassess notions of what success in Afghanistan looks like, examining  how potential outcomes 
might harm or benefit U.S. interests, and the relative levels  of U.S. engagement and investment 
required to attain them.68 The Washington Post’s December 2019 publication of the “Afghanistan 
Papers” (largely records of SIGAR interviews conducted as part of a lessons learned project) 
ignited  debate, including reactions from some Members of Congress, on these very issues (for 
more, see CRS Report R46197, The Washington Post’s “Afghanistan Papers” and U.S. Policy: 
Main Points and Possible Questions for Congress, by Clayton Thomas).  

65 U.S.  Department of State, Integrated Country Strategy: Afghanistan, September 27, 2018. 
66 A. T revor T hrall and Erik Goepner, “Another Year of the War in Afghanistan,” Texas National Security Review, 
September 11, 2018. See also Micah Zenko and Amelia Mae Wolfe, “T he Myth of the T errorist Safe Haven,” Foreign 
Policy, January 26, 2015. 
67 John Glaser  and John Mueller, “Afghanistan: A Failure  to T ell the T ruth,” LobeLog, September 13, 2019.  
68 See,  for example Jim Banks, “ T he Public Deserves an Afghanistan War Progress Report,” National Review, October 
23, 2018; Seth Jones, The U.S. Strategy in Afghanistan: The Perils  of Withdrawal,  Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, October 26, 2018. 

Congressional Research Service  

13 

 
 
 
 
 
                                              
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

How Afghanistan fits into broader U.S. strategy is another issue on which Members might 
engage, especially given competing fiscal priorities in light  of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as 
the Administration’s focus on strategic competition with other great powers.69 Some analysts 
recognize fatigue over “endless wars” like that in Afghanistan but argue against a potential U.S. 
retrenchment that could create a vacuum Russia or China might fill. 70 Others describe the U.S. 
military  effort in Afghanistan as a “peripheral war,” and suggest that “the billions  being spent on 
overseas contingency operation funding would be better spent on force modernization and 
training for future contingencies.”71 

69 See  CRS  In Focus  IF11139, Evaluating DOD Strategy: Key Findings of the Nation al Defense Strategy Commission, 
by Kathleen J. McInnis.  
70 The US Role In The Middle East In An Era Of Renewed Great Power Competition , Hoover Institution, April 2, 2019. 
71 Benjamin Denison, “ Confusion in the Pivot: T he Muddled  Shift from Peripheral War to Great Power Competition,” 
War  on the Rocks, February  12, 2019.  

Congressional Research Service  

14 

 
 
 
 
                                              
Appendix. U.S. Strikes, July 2019-February 2020 

Source: Created by CRS. Data from NATO Resolute Support Strike  Summaries;  boundaries from GADM. 

Note: Resolute Support defines a strike as “one or more  kinetic engagements that occur in roughly the same geographic location to produce a single,  sometimes 
cumulative effect in that location” against the Taliban and other armed groups. Data for March 2020 strikes  is unavailable as of May 1, 2020. 

CRS-15 

 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Author Contact Information 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern Affairs 
[redacted]@crs.loc.gov , 7-....

Acknowledgments 
The graphic “U.S. Strikes, July 2019-February 2020” was prepared by Amber Wilhelm, Visual Information 
Specialist, based on data analysis by Sarah Collins, Research Assistant.  

Congressional Research Service  

R45122 · VERSION 39 · UPDATED 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
   
 
EveryCRSReport.com

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) is a federal legislative branch agency, housed inside the 
Library of Congress, charged with providing the United States Congress non-partisan advice on 
issues that may come before Congress.

EveryCRSReport.com republishes CRS reports that are available to all Congressional staff. The 
reports are not classified, and Members of Congress routinely make individual reports available to 
the public. 

Prior to our republication, we redacted phone numbers and email addresses of analysts who 
produced the reports. We also added this page to the report. We have not intentionally made any 
other changes to any report published on EveryCRSReport.com.

CRS reports, as a work of the United States government, are not subject to copyright protection in 
the United States. Any CRS report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without 
permission from CRS. However, as a CRS report may include copyrighted images or material from a
third party, you may need to obtain permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or 
otherwise use copyrighted material.

Information in a CRS report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public 
understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to members of Congress in 
connection with CRS' institutional role.

EveryCRSReport.com is not a government website and is not affiliated with CRS. We do not claim 
copyright on any CRS report we have republished.

