Costa Rica: An Overview

Costa Rica historically has been an outpost of political and 
economic stability in an often-turbulent region. The United 
States has worked closely with the country to address 
challenges in Central America and to advance shared 
values, such as democracy and human rights, worldwide. 

Political Situation 
Costa Rica has sustained continuous civilian democratic 
governance since 1949, when the country adopted a new 
constitution in the aftermath of a short civil war. The 
center-left (now centrist) National Liberation Party (PLN) 
and a center-right opposition that ultimately became the 
Social Christian Unity Party dominated post-war politics. 
The two-party system has collapsed over the past 20 years, 
however, as many Costa Ricans have grown disenchanted 
with the country’s political class and have abandoned the 
traditional parties. This shift has allowed newer political 
forces to contest power, such as the center-left Citizens’ 
Action Party, which has won the past two presidential 
elections. It also has made governance more challenging, as 
party fragmentation has contributed to legislative gridlock. 

President Carlos Alvarado of the Citizens’ Action Party 
took office for a four-year term in May 2018 after defeating 
Fabricio Alvarado of the conservative National Restoration 
Party, 61% to 39%, in a second-round runoff. Alvarado 
must forge ad hoc coalitions to pass his policy agenda, 
since his party holds 10 of 57 seats in the unicameral 
Legislative Assembly. During the first three years of 
Alvarado’s term, Costa Rica legalized same-sex marriage, 
enacted structural reforms required for admission into the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 
and began implementing an ambitious plan to reduce net 
carbon emissions to zero by 2050. Other portions of 
Alvarado’s agenda have stalled due to fiscal constraints and 
the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.  

Costa Rica has been more successful than many Latin 
American countries in containing COVID-19. The 
Alvarado administration took swift action in March 2020 to 
slow the initial spread of the virus, imposing border 
restrictions, closing schools and nonessential businesses, 
and prohibiting mass gatherings. Infections began to rise in 
May 2020, however, after the government began to reopen 
the economy. Costa Rica has faced two large waves of 
infections since April 2021, which analysts have attributed 
to the spread of the Delta variant and a relaxation of public 
health restrictions. According to Johns Hopkins University, 
as of September 30, 2021, Costa Rica had recorded more 
than 530,000 cases and 6,300 deaths from COVID-19 and 
40% of its population was fully vaccinated. 

Alvarado’s approval rating spiked early in the pandemic but 
has returned to pre-pandemic levels. An August 2021 poll 
from the University of Costa Rica found that 20% of Costa 

Updated September 30, 2021

Ricans viewed Alvarado’s performance in office positively, 
58% viewed it negatively, and 22% held neutral opinions. 
Costa Rica’s next presidential and legislative elections are 
scheduled for February 6, 2022. 

Figure 1. Costa Rica at a Glance 

Sources: CRS Graphics, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos; 
Centro de Investigación y Estudios Políticos; International Monetary 
Fund; Trade Data Monitor. 

Economic and Social Conditions 
Costa Rica pursued state-led economic development 
throughout much of the 20th century but began to adopt a 
more market-oriented economic strategy in the 1980s. Over 
the past three decades, Costa Rica has attracted a cluster of 
high-tech manufacturers, such as medical device 
companies, and developed a dynamic tourism sector, 
contributing to the diversification of the country’s once 
predominantly agricultural economy. These newer 
industries provide higher pay and rising wages, but many 
Costa Ricans remain employed in traditional industries, 
which struggle to compete with imports and provide lower 
pay and precarious employment conditions. This 
divergence has reinforced Costa Rica’s relatively high level 
of income inequality. It also has contributed to high rates of 
unemployment and informal employment, eroding the tax 
base necessary to sustain Costa Rica’s social safety net.  

Socioeconomic conditions have deteriorated considerably 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the government 
enacted emergency measures to support businesses and 
households, the economy contracted by 4.1% and the 
poverty rate increased from 24% to 30% in 2020. More 
than 19% of Costa Ricans remained unemployed in the 
second quarter of 2021. Nevertheless, the Central Bank of 
Costa Rica estimates that economic activity has returned to 
pre-pandemic levels and forecasts 3.9% growth for 2021.  

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 
 
Costa Rica: An Overview 

The economic downturn also exacerbated Costa Rica’s 
fiscal challenges, as the budget deficit widened to 8.7% of 
GDP in 2020. The Alvarado administration negotiated a 
three-year, $1.8 billion financing arrangement with the 
International Monetary Fund intended to support Costa 
Rica’s economic recovery while stabilizing the country’s 
debt burden. The government’s proposed austerity 
measures sparked protests in September and October 2020 
and could generate further unrest, if implemented. 

transnational crime and other security threats. In the 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (P.L. 116-260), 
Congress appropriated $40.7 million of security assistance 
for Costa Rica. That total includes $8.2 million in bilateral 
military aid and $32.5 million through the Central America 
Regional Security Initiative (CARSI). The U.S. Department 
of Defense has provided additional support to Costa Rica in 
recent years, with a particular focus on increasing Costa 
Rica’s interdiction capabilities.  

U.S.-Costa Rican Relations 
The Alvarado administration has sought to maintain 
friendly relations with the United States. During a June 
2021 visit to Costa Rica, U.S. Secretary of State Antony 
Blinken highlighted bilateral economic and security ties as 
well as U.S.-Costa Rican cooperation to address shared 
challenges such as the COVID-19 pandemic, regional 
migration flows, and climate change. 

Trade and Investment Ties 
The United States and Costa Rica are parties to the 
Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR), which was signed in 2004 
and entered into force for Costa Rica in 2009. Bilateral 
trade more than doubled between 2008 and 2012 but has 
declined 43% over the past eight years, largely due to a 
steep drop in U.S. imports following Intel’s 2014 closure of 
a microprocessor manufacturing plant in Costa Rica. U.S.-
Costa Rican trade totaled $11 billion in 2020, a 3% decline 
compared with 2019. U.S. goods exports to Costa Rica 
amounted to $5.7 billion and U.S. goods imports from 
Costa Rica amounted to $5.4 billion in 2020, giving the 
United States a $331 million trade surplus. Top U.S. 
exports to Costa Rica in 2020 included mineral fuels, 
machinery and parts, medical instruments and equipment, 
and plastics; top U.S. imports from Costa Rica included 
medical instruments and equipment, fruit, electric 
machinery and parts, and coffee. 

CAFTA-DR includes a chapter on investment that is similar 
to a bilateral investment treaty. According to the U.S. 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, the accumulated stock of 
U.S. foreign direct investment in Costa Rica was $2 billion 
in 2020, with the manufacturing sector accounting for 45% 
of the total. 

Security Cooperation 
Although Costa Rica’s institutions have proven more 
resilient than those of its Central American neighbors, the 
country has experienced an increase in organized crime and 
related violence over the past decade. Costa Rica recorded 
570 homicides in 2020, giving it a homicide rate of 11.2 per 
100,000 residents. Costa Rican authorities have linked 
much of the violence to drug trafficking organizations, 
which use the country as a transit and storage point for 
South American cocaine destined for the U.S. market. Drug 
trafficking organizations also have sought to infiltrate Costa 
Rican institutions, contributing to increased corruption in 
the security forces and judiciary, according to the U.S. State 
Department. 

The United States coordinates closely with Costa Rica and 
provides the country with assistance to combat 

U.S. assistance has helped Costa Rica expand community-
based crime prevention programs, train security and justice 
sector personnel, and acquire equipment—including 
aircraft, patrol boats, and ground-based radar—that 
enhances the country’s ability to monitor and control its 
national territory. According to the U.S. State Department, 
Costa Rica, working closely with the United States, 
disrupted at least 17 international drug trafficking 
organizations and seized more than 71 metric tons of illicit 
drugs in 2020. 

COVID-19 
President Alvarado has repeatedly called on the 
international community to help developing countries 
obtain COVID-19 vaccines and recover from the pandemic. 
In July 2021, the United States donated 500,000 doses of 
the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine to Costa Rica. The United 
States also has provided more than $4 million of pandemic-
related assistance to Costa Rica, including personal 
protective equipment, medical and hygiene supplies, and 
mobile hospitals. 

Migration and Refugee Flows 
As a comparatively prosperous and stable country, Costa 
Rica has long served as a destination for migrants and 
asylum-seekers from other Latin American nations. The 
country has experienced a recent surge in asylum requests, 
however, primarily due to the ongoing political crisis in 
neighboring Nicaragua. According to the U.N. Refugee 
Agency, more than 85,000 Nicaraguans have sought asylum 
in Costa Rica since 2018. Costa Rica also has experienced 
increasing inflows of migrants and asylum-seekers from 
Venezuela, El Salvador, and Honduras. 

The Costa Rican government has sought to provide 
protection and humanitarian aid to those in need but has 
called on the international community for additional 
support. According to the U.S. Agency for International 
Development, the United States has provided $9.3 million 
to international humanitarian organizations in FY2021 to 
support migrants, asylum-seekers, and refugees in Costa 
Rica. 

In addition to those who have sought refuge in Costa Rica, 
many migrants pass through Costa Rican territory on their 
way to the United States. In recent years, such transitory 
flows have included large numbers of Cubans and Haitians, 
as well as extra-regional migrants from Africa and Asia. 
Costa Rica has worked with the U.S. government to 
conduct background checks on those transiting the country 
and to identify and respond to potential security threats 
before they reach the U.S. border.

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

Peter J. Meyer, Specialist in Latin American and Canadian 
Affairs   

IF10908

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10908 · VERSION 5 · UPDATED 

 
 
 
 
