Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: 
In Brief 

Updated June 11, 2021 

Congressional Research Service 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

R45122 

 
 
  
 
SUMMARY 

R45122 

Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: 
In Brief 
Afghanistan emerged as a significant U.S. foreign policy concern in 2001, when the 
United States, in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, led a military 
campaign against Al Qaeda and the Afghan Taliban government that harbored and 
supported it. In the intervening 19 years, the United States has suffered over 22,000 
military casualties (including around 2,400 fatalities) in Afghanistan and Congress has 
appropriated approximately $144 billion for reconstruction and security forces there. In that time, an elected 
Afghan government has replaced the Taliban; improvement in most measures of human development is limited; 
and future prospects of gains remain mixed.  

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern 
Affairs 

June 11, 2021 

The United States and its international partners are removing their military forces from Afghanistan as part of a 
withdrawal announced by President Biden on April 14, 2021, heralding a possible end to the nearly two-decade 
U.S. military presence in the country. In a February 2020 agreement with the Taliban, the Trump Administration 
had committed to withdrawing military forces by May 2021, in return for which the Taliban committed to 
preventing other groups, including Al Qaeda, from using Afghan soil to recruit, train, or fundraise toward 
activities that threaten the United States or its allies. U.S. officials contend that the Taliban have not fulfilled their 
commitments, as violence between the Taliban and Afghan government has increased and Taliban links with Al 
Qaeda remain in place, according to United Nations sanctions monitors.  

Afghan government representatives were not participants in U.S.-Taliban talks, leading some observers to 
conclude that the United States would prioritize a military withdrawal over securing a political settlement that 
preserves some of the social, political, and humanitarian gains made since 2001. After months of delays, on 
September 12, 2020, Afghan government and Taliban representatives officially met in Doha, Qatar, to begin their 
first direct peace negotiations toward such a settlement, a significant moment with potentially dramatic 
implications for the course of the ongoing Afghan conflict. Talks between the two sides continue but have not 
made substantial progress and remain complicated by a number of factors.  

In light of the stalling of intra-Afghan talks, the United States appears to have intensified its efforts to broker an 
intra-Afghan agreement. The United States reportedly produced a draft peace agreement to “jumpstart” 
negotiations that includes a variety of options, including the establishment of an interim “transitional” 
government, which Afghan President Ashraf Ghani has rejected. The culmination of these efforts was to be a 
senior-level Afghan conference in Turkey planned for April 2021, but the Taliban refused to attend and continue 
to reject participating in such a meeting. Observers speculate about what kind of political arrangement, if any, 
could satisfy both the elected Afghan government and the Taliban, who have not specified in detail their vision for 
Afghanistan’s future beyond creating an “Islamic government.”  

Afghan officials have sought to downplay the impact of the U.S. military withdrawal on their own forces’ 
capabilities, but some official U.S. assessments indicate that the withdrawal could lead to Taliban gains on the 
battlefield. By many measures, the Taliban are in a stronger position now than at any point since 2001, controlling 
as much as half of the country, though many once-public U.S. government metrics related to the conflict have 
been classified or are no longer produced. Future changes in political arrangements and/or in the security 
environment may in turn influence U.S. policymakers’ consideration of future levels and conditions of 
development assistance. It is unclear to what extent, if at all, the prospect of continued U.S. assistance to 
Afghanistan (which remains one of the world’s poorest countries) represents leverage over the Taliban.  

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
  
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Contents 

Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 
Background: U.S.-Taliban Agreement ............................................................................................. 1 
U.S. Military Drawdown ................................................................................................................. 2 
Impact of U.S. Military Drawdown: Afghan Forces and Security Dynamics ........................... 3 
Impact of U.S. Military Drawdown: Democracy and Human Rights in Afghanistan ............... 6 
Intra-Afghan Talks and Efforts to Achieve a Settlement ................................................................. 8 
Accelerated U.S. Diplomatic Efforts ......................................................................................... 9 
Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors ..................................................................... 10 
Economy and U.S. Aid ................................................................................................................... 11 
Outlook and Issues for Congress ................................................................................................... 12 

Figures 

Figure 1. Taliban Controlled and Contested Districts in Afghanistan ............................................. 4 

Contacts 

Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 13 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Introduction 
This report provides background information and analysis on U.S. policy in Afghanistan, with a 
focus on the ongoing U.S. military withdrawal and its implications for a number of factors, 
including: 

 

 
 

security dynamics and the ongoing conflict between the Afghan government and 
the Taliban;  

the social and political gains made in Afghanistan since 2001; and  
intra-Afghan negotiations, which began in Doha, Qatar, in September 2020, but 
appear to have since stalled.  

The report also provides information on questions about the future of U.S. development and 
security aid to Afghanistan (which has totaled approximately $144 billion since 2001). 

Background: U.S.-Taliban Agreement 
After more than a year of negotiations, U.S. and Taliban representatives signed a bilateral 
agreement on February 29, 2020, agreeing to two “interconnected” guarantees: the withdrawal of 
all U.S. and international forces by May 2021, and unspecified Taliban action to prevent other 
groups (including Al Qaeda) from using Afghan soil to threaten the United States and its allies.1 

In the months after the agreement, several U.S. officials asserted that the Taliban were not 
fulfilling their commitments under the accord, especially with regard to Al Qaeda (see text box 
below).2 U.S. officials also described increased Taliban violence as “not consistent” with the 
agreement.3 Although no provisions in the publicly available agreement address Taliban attacks 
on U.S. or Afghan forces, the Taliban reportedly committed not to attack U.S. forces in non-
public annexes accompanying the accord.4 Some lawmakers have raised questions about the 
executive branch’s decision to classify these annexes.5 In Section 1217 of the FY2021 National 
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA, P.L. 116-283), Congress directed the Administration to, 
among other requirements, submit within 90 days after enactment and not less than every 120 
days thereafter, a report verifying that the Taliban is upholding its commitments under the 
February 2020 accord. 

Al Qaeda and the Taliban 
Al Qaeda (AQ) is still assessed to have a presence in Afghanistan and its decades-long ties with the Taliban appear 
to have remained strong in recent years. In May 2021, U.N. sanctions monitors reported that Al Qaeda “has 

1 The text of the agreement is available at https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Agreement-For-
Bringing-Peace-to-Afghanistan-02.29.20.pdf. Non-public annexes accompanied the agreement. 
2 “Taliban not living up to its commitments, U.S. Defense Secretary says,” Reuters, May 5, 2020. 
3 “Violence ‘Not Consistent’ with US-Taliban Deal: US Envoy,” TOLOnews, October 13, 2020. 
4 In March 2020 testimony, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Mark Milley told a Senate Armed Services 
Committee panel that committee members “have all the documents associated with this agreement” and that, in them, 
the Taliban pledged not to attack U.S. or international forces, as well as Afghan provincial capitals and other high 
profile targets. “Senate Armed Services Committee Holds Hearing on the Defense Budget Posture,” CQ Congressional 
Transcripts, March 4, 2020. 
5 Josh Rogin, “Pompeo under pressure to release Taliban deal ‘secret annexes’” (opinion), Washington Post, March 4, 
2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

1 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

minimized over communications with Taliban leadership in an effort to ‘lay low’ and not jeopardize the Taliban’s 
diplomatic position.”6 In October 2020, Afghan forces killed a high-ranking AQ operative in Afghanistan’s Ghazni 
province, where he reportedly was living and working with Taliban forces, further underscoring questions about 
AQ-Taliban links and Taliban intentions with regard to Al Qaeda.7  
In general, U.S. government assessments indicate that the Taliban are not fulfilling their counterterrorism 
commitments concerning Al Qaeda. For example, in its report on the final quarter of 2020, the Office of the 
Inspector General for the Department of Defense relayed an assessment from the Defense Intelligence Agency 
(DIA) that the Taliban maintain ties to Al Qaeda and that some AQ members are “integrated into the Taliban’s 
forces and command structure.”8 In a semiannual report released in April 2021, the Department of Defense 
stated, “The Taliban have maintained mutually beneficial relations with AQ-related organizations and are unlikely 
to take substantive action against these groups.”9 The U.S.-Taliban accord is silent on what verification 
mechanisms might be in place to ensure Taliban compliance, and to what extent (if at all) the U.S. withdrawal 
might be paused or reversed based on Taliban action (or inaction) with regard to Al Qaeda.  

U.S. Military Drawdown10 
The United States began withdrawing forces before the February 2020 agreement was reached 
and continued to do so afterwards, despite U.S. assertions that Taliban violence and other actions 
were inconsistent with the agreement.11 On January 15, 2021, then-Acting Secretary of Defense 
Christopher Miller announced that the number of U.S. forces had reached 2,500, the lowest level 
since 2001, completing a drawdown ordered by President Donald Trump in November 2020.  

On April 14, 2021, President Joe Biden announced that the United States would begin a “final 
withdrawal” on May 1, to be completed by September 11, 2021.12 In a written response, the 
Taliban accused the United States of breaching the February 2020 agreement and stated that the 
U.S. decision to stay beyond May 1 “in principle opens the way for [Taliban forces] to take every 
necessary countermeasure, hence the American side will be held responsible for all future 
consequences.”13 A senior Administration official said after the withdrawal announcement, “We 
have communicated to the Taliban in no uncertain terms that if they do conduct attacks against 
U.S. or allied forces…we will hit back hard.”14 Presidents Barack Obama and Donald Trump also 
expressed an intention to withdraw U.S. forces from Afghanistan, sometimes by specified dates, 
but did not do so during their terms in office. Alongside the U.S. withdrawal, NATO and other 

6 Twelfth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2557 
(2020) concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities constituting a threat to the peace, stability 
and security of Afghanistan, U.N. Document S/2021/486, released May 27, 2020. 
7 Jeff Seldin, “US Calls Death of al-Qaida Official a Major Setback for Terror Group,” Voice of America, October 26, 
2020. 
8 Operation Freedom’s Sentinel: Lead Inspector General Report to the United States Congress, October 1, 2020 - 
December 31, 2020, released February 17, 2021. 
9 U.S. Department of Defense, Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan, December 2020, released April 23, 
2021.  
10 See CRS Report R46670, U.S. Military Drawdown in Afghanistan: Frequently Asked Questions, coordinated by 
Clayton Thomas. 
11 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Mujib Mashal, “U.S. Is Quietly Reducing Its Troop Force in Afghanistan,” New York 
Times, October 21, 2019; Kylie Atwood and Ryan Browne, “US troop drawdown in Afghanistan running ahead of 
schedule,” CNN, April 30, 2020. 
12 White House, “Remarks by President Biden on the Way Forward in Afghanistan,” April 14, 2021. 
13 “Statement of Islamic Emirate regarding recent announcement by US President Joe Biden,” Voice of Jihad, April 15, 
2021. 
14 White House, “Background Press Call by a Senior Administration Official on Afghanistan,” April 13, 2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

2 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

partner countries (whose forces outnumber those of the United States in Afghanistan) also are 
executing a full withdrawal. 

Impact of U.S. Military Drawdown: Afghan Forces and Security 
Dynamics 

In general, Trump Administration officials maintained that the troop reduction would not result in 
any major changes to the two complementary U.S. missions in Afghanistan: counterterrorism and 
training, advising, and assisting Afghan forces. However, some military officials implied at the 
time that the reduced troop level ordered by President Trump might result in some adjustments to 
U.S. operations and limits to U.S. capabilities. Many outside observers, including the 
congressionally mandated Afghanistan Study Group, questioned the extent to which the United 
States could perform both the training and counterterrorism missions at acceptable risk levels 
with 2,500 forces.15  

The Afghanistan National Defense and Security Forces 

The effectiveness of the ANDSF is considered key to the security of Afghanistan, and U.S. and international 
support has been widely viewed as critical to supporting the ANDSF. President Ghani has said, “[W]e will not be 
able to support our army for six months without U.S. [financial] support.”16 Since 2014, the United States 
generally has provided around 75% of the estimated $5 billion to $6 billion a year required to fund the ANDSF, 
with the balance coming from U.S. partners and the Afghan government. For FY2021, Congress appropriated just 
over $3 billion for the ANDSF, the lowest annual appropriation since FY2008.17  
It remains unclear how the U.S. military withdrawal might impact congressional willingness to continue providing 
this assistance, which some may view as insufficient, in and of itself, to maintain the viability of Afghan forces. In a 
reported letter to President Ghani (more below), Secretary Blinken stated, “Even with the continuation of 
financial assistance from the United States to your forces after an American military withdrawal, I am concerned 
that the security situation will worsen and the Taliban could make rapid territorial gains.” In any case, continued 
international assistance will likely be necessary for the foreseeable future: the Pentagon reported in June 2020 that 
“full [financial] self-sufficiency by 2024 does not appear realistic, even if levels of violence and, with it, the ANDSF 
force structure, reduce significantly.”18  
Total ANDSF strength was reported at more than 307,000 as of January 2021. Other metrics related to ANDSF 
strength and performance, including casualty and attrition rates, have been classified by U.S. Forces-Afghanistan 
(USFOR-A) starting with the October 2017 SIGAR quarterly report, citing a request from the Afghan government, 
although SIGAR had previously published those metrics as part of its quarterly reports.19 

Under the Biden Administration, U.S. officials have expressed an intention to continue “over-the-
horizon” counterterrorism efforts after U.S. troops depart Afghanistan. In his April 14 address, 
President Biden said, “We’ll reorganize our counterterrorism capabilities and the substantial 
assets in the region to prevent reemergence of terrorists” in Afghanistan.20 Questions remain as to 
what such an effort might look like in practice, and what the potential logistical, political, 
financial challenges might be, including establishing new arrangements with Afghan partners and 
new basing options outside of Afghanistan. 

15 Afghanistan Study Group Final Report, United States Institute of Peace, February 2021. 
16 Anwar Iqbal, “Afghan Army to Collapse in Six Months Without US Help: Ghani,” Dawn, January 18, 2018. 
17 Congress also rescinded $1.1 billion in FY2020 ASFF funding. For more, see CRS Report R45329, Afghanistan: 
Issues for Congress and Legislation 2017-2020. 
18 Department of Defense, “Enhancing Security and Stability in Afghanistan,” June 2020. 
19 “Report: US Officials Classify Crucial Metrics on Afghan Casualties, Readiness,” Military Times, October 30, 2017. 
20 White House, “Remarks by President Biden,” op. cit. 

Congressional Research Service  

3 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Figure 1. Taliban Controlled and Contested 
Districts in Afghanistan 
As of October 2020 

Afghan officials have sought to downplay the detrimental impact of the U.S. troop withdrawal 
while emphasizing the need for continued U.S. financial assistance to Afghan forces.21 In a May 
2021 press conference, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Mark Milley said “bad 
outcomes” are not “inevitable,” given 
what he characterized as the strengths of 
the Afghan government and military.22 
Some other U.S. government assessments 
are less positive: in its 2021 annual threat 
assessment, the Office of the Director of 
National Intelligence reported that “the 
Afghan Government will struggle to hold 
the Taliban at bay if the Coalition 
withdraws support.”23 U.S. military 
officials have said various options, 
including remote training (which has 
largely been in place since the onset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic) or training 
Afghan personnel in third countries, are 
under consideration to continue 
supporting Afghan forces.24 The 
departure of U.S. contractors may also 
pose short term threats to Afghan 
capabilities, given Afghan forces’ 
reliance on contractor support for most 
maintenance work. For example, in a 
February 2021 report, the U.S. military 
assessed that without DOD-funded 
contractor support, no Afghan airframes 
“can be sustained as combat effective for more than a few months.”25 U.S. military officials are 
reportedly considering seeking authorization for airstrikes (likely launched from U.S. bases in the 
Persian Gulf) against the Taliban in the event that Kabul or other major cities are at risk.26  

Source: The Economist (using data and analysis from Long 
War Journal) 

Beyond the immediate effects on Afghan forces and their capabilities, a full U.S. military 
withdrawal may have second- or third-order effects on the fragile Afghan state, especially when it 
comes to local perceptions of U.S. intentions and of the impact of U.S. withdrawal on Afghan 
forces. Some Afghans, recalling the complex, multi-sided civil war of the 1990s, have suggested 
that their communities (and, often, their associated militias) may pursue more independent 
courses of action if the Afghan government is unable to provide security in the context of the U.S 

21 Zahra Rahimi, “ANDSF Showcases Air Force as Country Braces for US Pullout,” TOLOnews, April 26, 2021.  
22 Transcript: Secretary of Defense Austin and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Milley Press Briefing, 
Department of Defense, May 6, 2021. 
23 Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community, Office of the Director of National Intelligence, April 
19, 2021. 
24 Transcript: Secretary of Defense Austin and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Milley Press Briefing, 
Department of Defense, May 6, 2021. 
25 Operation Freedom’s Sentinel, op. cit.  
26 Helene Cooper, et al., “U.S. Weighs Possibility of Airstrikes if Afghan Forces Face Crisis,” New York Times, June 9, 
2021.  

Congressional Research Service  

4 

 
 
                                                 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

withdrawal.27 Some Afghan leaders have suggested that continued infighting among Afghan elites 
may pose as much of a threat to the Afghan political system as the Taliban.28 

Operations by the Taliban, whose strength has been estimated at 60,000 full-time fighters, against 
Afghan government forces continue, including numerous attacks nationwide after the U.S. 
withdrawal began on May 1. A major offensive by the Taliban in May 2021 prompted the United 
States to launch airstrikes in support of Afghan government forces in southern Afghanistan’s 
Helmand Province. The group controls or contexts more territory in 2021 than at any point since 
2001 by many measures (see Figure 1).29 

The United Nations mission in Afghanistan reported that while the number of civilian casualties 
in 2020 fell below 10,000 for the first time since 2013, violence against civilians increased in the 
months following the start of intra-Afghan negotiations in September 2020.30 Targeted attacks 
have risen in recent months. The Taliban denied involvement in the January 2021 assassination of 
female Supreme Court judges in Kabul and other attacks, but the United States and other 
countries released a joint statement on January 31, 2021, charging that “the Taliban bears 
responsibility for the majority of this targeted violence.”31 The Taliban also denied responsibility 
for a May 8, 2021, attack targeting schoolgirls in a Kabul neighborhood populated mostly by 
Hazaras (an ethnoreligious Shia minority); the attack killed more than 80 and wounded nearly 
150. That attack was not claimed by the regional Islamic State affiliate, though that group has 
often targeted Afghan Hazaras (see textbox). 

Islamic State-Khorasan Province 
Beyond the Taliban, a significant share of U.S. operations have been aimed at the local Islamic State affiliate, known 
as Islamic State-Khorasan Province (ISKP, also known as ISIS-K). Estimates of ISKP strength generally ranged from 
2,000 to 4,000 fighters until ISKP “collapsed” in late 2019 due to offensives by U.S. and Afghan forces and, 
separately, the Taliban.32 ISKP and Taliban forces have sometimes fought over control of territory or because of 
political or other differences.33 A number of ISKP leaders have been killed in U.S. strikes since 2016, and Afghan 
forces arrested and captured two successive ISKP leaders in the spring of 2020. U.S. officials caution that ISKP 
remains a threat, pointing to several high profile attacks attributed to the group in 2020. The United Nations 
reports that casualties from ISKP attacks in 2020 decreased 45% from 2019.34 Some suggest that the Taliban’s 

27 Sune Engel Rasmussen and Ehsanullah Amiri, “Afghanistan Braces for the Worst as U.S. Troop Withdrawal 
Accelerates,” Wall Street Journal, November 19, 2020; “Atta Noor threatens to ‘take action’ against security situation,” 
Ariana News, December 24, 2020. 
28 Anisa Shaneed, “Abdullah: Political Division Will Cause Collapse,” TOLOnews, June 3, 2021. 
29 See also Twelfth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 
2557 (2020) concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities constituting a threat to the peace and 
stability of Afghanistan, United Nations Security Council, (S/2021/486), released June 1, 2021, which relays an 
assessment from unspecified Member States that the Taliban “contest or control an estimated 50 to 70 per cent of 
Afghan territory outside of urban centers, while also exerting direct control over 57 per cent of district administrative 
centers.”  
30 United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Afghanistan: Protection of Civilians in Armed 
Conflict, Annual Report 2020, February 2021. 
31 U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan, “Statement on Continuation of Assassinations, Kidnapping, and Destruction of Vital 
Infrastructure,” January 31, 2021. 
32 “ISIS Is Losing Afghan Territory. That Means Little for Its Victims,” New York Times, December 2, 2019. 
33 See, for example, Shawn Snow, “ISIS loses more than half its fighters from US airstrikes and Taliban ground 
operations,” Military Times, February 27, 2020. 
34 UNAMA, Afghanistan: Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict, op. cit. 

Congressional Research Service  

5 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

participation in peace talks or a putative political settlement could prompt disaffected (or newly unemployed) 
fighters to join ISKP.35  

The Afghan government has prioritized a permanent ceasefire, which the Taliban have rejected, 
though they have in recent years conducted three limited truces during religious holidays 
(including in mid-May 2021). Many observers doubt the Taliban would agree to abandon 
violence, arguably their main source of leverage, before an intra-Afghan political settlement, 
though targeted reductions in violence could pave the way for a more comprehensive ceasefire.36  

Impact of U.S. Military Drawdown: Democracy and Human Rights 
in Afghanistan  

By all accounts, Afghanistan has made progress on recognizing and protecting Afghans’ rights 
since Taliban rule ended in 2001. The scale of that progress is disputed, however, and 
government-aligned entities are alleged to participate in a range of human rights abuses. Experts 
differ over the extent to which the Taliban have changed since 2001, if at all. The Taliban have 
not described in detail their plans for Afghan governance, but many expect social and political 
gains to be reversed if the Taliban come back into power in some fashion following a U.S. 
military withdrawal. 

The 2004 Afghan constitution establishes a democratic political system in which basic freedoms, 
including of religion, expression, assembly, and association, are guaranteed. In practice, elections 
have regularly been fraught with accusations of fraud, and governing institutions are often weak 
and ineffective. The constitution arguably creates an overly powerful executive branch, 
disincentivizing compromise as various factions vie for the all-important presidency in a zero-
sum game. Endemic corruption in particular has long been identified as a potent threat that 
undermines Afghan state institutions, delegitimizes the Afghan government in the eyes of many 
of its citizens, and discourages private sector investment and development.37  

Successive State Department annual reports on human rights practices indicate widespread 
human rights abuses in government-held areas.38 Respect for human rights, including for the 
equal rights of women, appears even more limited in areas outside of the government’s control. 
The State Department reports that the Taliban conduct public executions, forced confessions, and 
other abuses under their parallel justice system; that the group strictly polices expression and 
routinely attacks journalists; and that it restricts girls’ access to education.39  

There appear to be some changes to the Taliban’s rhetoric and actions since 2001, though experts 
disagree about the extent and significance of such changes.40 One Afghan journalist’s April 2021 
report from Taliban-controlled areas of Helmand Province indicates that, at least in some areas, 

35 Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Zabihullah Ghazi, “Foes in Afghan War See Common Threat of Islamic State’s Return,” 
New York Times, March 22, 2021. 
36 Abdul Qadir Sediqi, “Fight and talk: Facing negotiations, Taliban almost took key Afghan city,” Reuters, September 
14, 2020. 
37 See “The State of Corruption in Afghanistan and the Role of Independent Institutions,” Prepared remarks of John 
Sopko, Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, Integrity Watch Afghanistan Webinar Event, June 
24, 2020. 
38 U.S. Department of State, 2020 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, March 30, 2021. 
39 Ibid. 
40 Thomas Ruttig, “Have the Taliban Changed?” CTC Sentinel, March 2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

6 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

the group does not have either the inclination, willingness, and/or ability to enforce the kinds of 
societal controls that it attempted to implement until 2001.41 Politically, some analysts posit the 
Taliban are likely to push for clerical oversight of executive and legislative decision-making as a 
“hybrid” of their 1996-2001 emirate and a more Western-style state.42 

The Taliban, who have focused on securing the withdrawal of foreign forces, have not detailed 
their proposals on governance issues. In remarks at the opening of intra-Afghan talks in 
September 2020, Taliban deputy political leader Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar said, “We seek an 
Afghanistan that is independent, sovereign, united, developed and free—an Afghanistan with an 
Islamic system in which all people of the nation can participate without discrimination.”43 In 
February 2021, Baradar wrote that the group is committed to protecting certain rights with 
conditions, such as “all rights of women afforded to them by Islamic law” and “freedom of 
speech within the framework of Islamic principles and national interests.”44 In a June 2021 
interview, a Taliban spokesman referred to establishing an “Islamic government” as the group’s 
“second goal” (after the departure of foreign forces from Afghanistan), adding that “if this second 
goal is not reached, we will be compelled to continue our war to achieve our goal.”45 

Afghan leaders express a determination to preserve Afghanistan’s democratic institutions and its 
constitution, which establishes Islam as the state religion but does not necessarily tie legislation 
and national policymaking to religious jurisprudence. In a September 2020 interview, High 
Council for National Reconciliation Chairman Abdullah Abdullah said, “For me, one person, one 
vote—I don’t call anything a red line—but that’s critical ... and compromises on these things will 
not get us to peace.”46 President Ashraf Ghani has stated that his government will not conclude 
any agreement that limits Afghans’ rights, adding that any agreement to withdraw U.S. forces that 
did not include Kabul’s participation could lead to “catastrophe,” pointing to the 1990s-era civil 
strife following the fall of the Soviet-backed government that led to the rise of the Taliban.47  

Some Afghans and other international observers have proposed the formation of an interim 
government, arguing that the Taliban’s continued refusal to recognize the Afghan government 
might make such a step necessary.48 President Ghani and other Afghan officials have rejected 
such proposals, including from the United States (see below).49 

Press reports suggest that Afghans who have benefitted from the socio-political reforms of the 
past two decades view the U.S. troop drawdown warily.50 In remarks announcing the withdrawal 

41 Fazelminallah Qazizai, “After America: Inside the Taliban’s New Emirate,” Newlines, April 14, 2021. 
42 Frud Bezhan, “Are the Taliban Seeking A ‘Sunni Afghan Version’ of Iran?” RFE/RL, October 2, 2020. 
43 Ayaz Gul, “Afghan Rivals Begin Historic Peace Talks; US Cautiously Optimistic,” Voice of America, September 12, 
2020. 
44 Open letter to the people of the United States of America, February 16, 2021. Available at 
http://alemarahenglish.net/?p=42767. 
45 Lynne O’Donnell, “Taliban Map Out Future Vision for Afghanistan,” Foreign Policy, June 8, 2021. 
46 Susannah George, “The Taliban and the Afghan government are finally talking peace: What they’re negotiating and 
what to expect,” Washington Post, September 12, 2020. 
47 Philip Walter Wellman, “Ghani tells Afghan peace deal with Taliban will not compromise basic rights,” Stars and 
Stripes, January 28, 2019; “Afghans Worry as US Makes Progress in Taliban Talks,” Voice of America, January 29, 
2019.  
48 Frud Bezhan, “Would an Afghan Interim Government Help or Hinder Peace Efforts?” Gandhara, January 14, 2021. 
49 Pamela Constable, “Peace talks are faltering, violence has surged, and U.S. troops are pulling out. Can the Afghan 
government withstand the pressure?” Washington Post, January 13, 2021. 
50 Thomas Gibbons-Neff, “Afghans wonder ‘What about us?’ as U.S. troops prepare to withdraw,” New York Times, 
April 14, 2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

7 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

plan, President Biden said that “we’ll continue to support the rights of Afghan women and girls 
by maintaining significant humanitarian and development assistance.”51 It is unclear to what 
extent, if at all, U.S. assistance might be able to shape the trajectory of respect for human rights in 
Afghanistan if the broader political and governance context becomes less hospitable, or whether 
such assistance might represent a strong enough incentive to shape Taliban approaches to human 
rights or democracy (see “Outlook and Issues for Congress,” below).  

Intra-Afghan Talks and Efforts to Achieve a 
Settlement 
Intra-Afghan talks aimed at reaching a comprehensive peace settlement began in Doha, Qatar, in 
September 2020, representing a major step toward resolving the conflict. The two sides have met 
sporadically in recent months, but appear to remain far apart on the two key issues that appear to 
be central to talks—reducing violence and determining the future structure and orientation of the 
Afghan state.52  

The U.S.-Taliban agreement committed the Taliban to entering talks with the Afghan government 
by March, but negotiations remained unscheduled for months amid complications including 
gridlock in Kabul due to the disputed September 2019 presidential election, delays to a prisoner 
exchange between Taliban and the Afghan government, and ongoing violence. Afghan President 
Ashraf Ghani and Abdullah Abdullah, Ghani’s electoral opponent and former partner in a unity 
government, agreed in May 2020 to end their political impasse and appoint Abdullah as chairman 
of the newly-created High Council for National Reconciliation (HCNR) to oversee talks with the 
Taliban.53 The prisoner exchange was completed in early September 2020, removing the main 
obstacle to intra-Afghan talks, which began in Doha that month. The two sides have met 
intermittently in recent months, with some describing the talks as stalled.54 

Some doubt the Taliban’s trustworthiness and express concern that, in the absence of U.S. 
military pressure, the group will have little incentive to comply with the terms of any agreement 
reached with Kabul.55 Some Afghan officials reportedly suspect the Taliban of trying to “run out 
the clock on the withdrawal of American troops,” remaining in negotiations long enough to 
secure a full U.S. withdrawal, after which they will capitalize on their advantage on the battlefield 
to seize control of the country by force.56 Still, at least some Afghans reportedly support “peace at 
any cost” given the decades of conflict through which the country has suffered.57 

51 “President Biden Delivers Remarks on Afghanistan Strategy,” C-SPAN, April 14, 2021. 
52 Kathy Gannon, “Afghan Peace Talks Resume, but Path is Anything but Certain,” Associated Press, February 23, 
2021. 
53 Ali Yawar Adili, “End of the Post-Election Impasse? Ghani and Abdullah’s new power-sharing formula,” 
Afghanistan Analysts Network, May 20, 2020. For more on Afghanistan’s political system, and accusations that it is 
overcentralized and fuels conflict, see CRS Report R45818, Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy, by Clayton 
Thomas. 
54 Alexander Cornwell, “Afghan peace talks should rotate among countries, envoy says amid stall,” Reuters, March 15, 
2021. 
55 Deb Riechmann, “Critics of US-Taliban Deal Say Militants Can’t Be Trusted,” Associated Press, July 4, 2020. 
56 Mujib Mashal, “Violent attacks plague Afghanistan as peace talks in Doha slow,” New York Times, Sept. 19, 2020. 
57 Susannah George and Sharif Hassan, “Faced with the prospect of formal peace talks, Afghans consider what they’re 
willing to concede,” Washington Post, June 7, 2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

8 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Accelerated U.S. Diplomatic Efforts 

In spring 2021, with talks in Doha having made no evident progress, the Biden Administration 
launched an intensified U.S. diplomatic push to broker an intra-Afghan agreement. On March 7, 
2021, the Afghan media outlet TOLOnews published an undated letter reportedly from U.S. 
Secretary of State Antony Blinken to President Ghani.58 In the letter, Secretary Blinken reportedly 
asked President Ghani to exercise “urgent leadership” in forming a “united front” with other 
Afghan political leaders.59  

The United States also reportedly prepared a draft peace proposal for consideration by Afghan 
negotiators (the text of which was also published by TOLOnews). The document, which is 
described as “intended to jumpstart” talks by providing concrete power-sharing alternatives, 
proposes the formation of a “transitional peace government,” including the selection of a new 
president “acceptable to both sides.”60 The document also proposes possible changes to the 
Afghan parliament and provincial councils (in both cases by either adding Taliban members to the 
current bodies or suspending them during the transitional government); the creation of a new 
High Council for Islamic Jurisprudence to “review” legislation “to ensure compliance” with 
Islam; and the writing of a new Constitution by a 21-member commission. 

The culmination of these U.S. efforts was to be a “senior-level meeting” in Istanbul, Turkey in 
late April “to finalize an agreement,” per Secretary Blinken’s letter. On April 13, shortly after the 
publication of reports about President Biden’s decision to maintain U.S. troops in Afghanistan 
beyond May 1, a Taliban spokesman wrote on Twitter that “[u]ntil all foreign forces completely 
withdraw from our homeland….[the Taliban] will not participate in any conference that shall 
make decisions about Afghanistan.”61 Turkey has postponed the meeting indefinitely, and the 
Taliban reportedly have refused to attend unless the meeting is short and comprised of low-level 
delegations who will not make decisions on critical issues.62  

For his part, President Ghani has proposed a presidential election within six months in which he 
would not run, per a top advisor; in response to those reports, the Taliban rejected such a plan, 
arguing that previous elections had “pushed the country to the verge of crisis.”63 President Ghani 
is widely viewed as severely weakened and isolated, and U.S. officials have reportedly “lost 
patience” with him and his refusal to consider stepping down.64 

58 When asked about the accuracy of reports about the letter and draft peace proposal on March 8, 2021, State 
Department Spokesman Ned Price said, “I’m not going to be able to comment on any reported private 
correspondence.” U.S. Department of State, Department Press Briefing, March 8, 2021. 
59 Thomas Gibbons-Neff, David Zucchino, and Lara Jakes, “U.S. Pushes U.N.-led Conference in Letter to Afghan 
Leader,” New York Times, March 7, 2021. Text of the letter available at https://tolonews.com/pdf/02.pdf.  
60 “Exclusive: Details of Proposed Draft for Afghan Peace,” TOLOnews, March 7, 2021. 
61 Muhammad Naeem (@IeaOffice), Twitter, April 13, 2021, 3:59PM.  
62 Tahir Khan, “VOA Exclusive: Taliban Attach Conditions to Istanbul Conference Participation,” VOA, May 25, 2021. 
63 Hamid Shalizi, “Exclusive: Afghan president, rejecting US peace plan, to offer election in six months, officials say,” 
Reuters, March 23, 2021; “Taliban slam Afghan president’s proposal for new election,” France24, March 24, 2021; 
“Ghani will not run in any eventual election,” Afghanistan Times, April 3, 2021. 
64 Adam Nossiter, “Afghan President in ‘Desperate Situation’ as His Power Is Undermined,” New York Times, April 
10, 2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

9 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors 
Regional dynamics, and the involvement of outside powers, directly affect the conflict in 
Afghanistan. The neighboring state widely considered most important in this regard is Pakistan, 
which has played an active, and by many accounts negative, role in Afghan affairs for decades. 
Pakistan’s security services maintain ties to Afghan insurgent groups, most notably the Haqqani 
Network.65 Afghan leaders, along with U.S. military commanders, have attributed much of the 
insurgency’s power and longevity either directly or indirectly to Pakistani support.66 The Trump 
Administration sought Islamabad’s assistance in U.S. talks with the Taliban after 2018, and U.S. 
assessments of Taliban’s role have generally been more positive since. For example, Khalilzad 
thanked Pakistan for releasing Baradar from custody in October 2018 and for facilitating the 
travel of Taliban figures to talks in Doha, and Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin “expressed 
gratitude” to his Pakistani counterpart in March 2021 for Pakistan’s “continued support for the 
Afghan peace process.”67 Pakistani leaders assert, however, that their country will not host U.S. 
bases after the military withdrawal from Afghanistan.68 

Despite official Pakistani leadership’s statements to the contrary, Islamabad may view a weak and 
destabilized Afghanistan as preferable to a strong, unified Afghan state (particularly one led by an 
ethnic Pashtun-dominated government in Kabul; Pakistan has a large and restive Pashtun 
minority).69 Afghanistan-Pakistan relations are further complicated by the presence of over one 
million Afghan refugees in Pakistan, as well as a long-running and ethnically tinged dispute over 
their shared 1,600-mile border.70 Pakistan’s security establishment, fearful of strategic 
encirclement by India, apparently continues to view the Afghan Taliban as a relatively friendly 
and reliably anti-India element in Afghanistan. India’s diplomatic and commercial presence in 
Afghanistan—and U.S. rhetorical support for it—exacerbates Pakistani fears of encirclement. 
India has been the largest regional contributor to Afghan reconstruction, but New Delhi has not 
shown an inclination to pursue a deeper defense relationship with Kabul and, according to one 
June 2021 media report, has “opened channels of communication” with Taliban leaders.71 

Afghanistan maintains mostly cordial ties with its other neighbors, notably the post-Soviet states 
of Central Asia, whose role in Afghanistan has been relatively limited but could increase.72 In the 
past two years, multiple U.S. commanders have warned of increased levels of support for the 

65 For more, see CRS In Focus IF10604, Al Qaeda and Islamic State Affiliates in Afghanistan, by Clayton Thomas.  
66 White House, Remarks by President Trump on the Strategy in Afghanistan and South Asia, August 21, 2017. Some 
Pakistani officials disputed that charge and noted the Taliban’s increased territorial control within Afghanistan itself. 
Author interviews with Pakistani military officials, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, February 21, 2018. 
67 “Mullah Baradar released by Pakistan at the behest of US: Khalilzad,” The Hindu, February 9, 2019. Baradar had 
been imprisoned in Pakistan since his capture in Karachi in a joint U.S.-Pakistani operation in 2010. Baqir Sajjad Syed, 
“Pentagon chief praises Pakistan’s role in Afghan peace process,” Dawn, March 23, 2021.  
68 “Pakistan refused to give military bases to US: FM,” Pakistan Today, June 8, 2021. 
69 Pashtuns are an ethnic group that makes up about 40% of Afghanistan’s 35 million people and 15% of Pakistan’s 215 
million; they thus represent a plurality in Afghanistan but are a relatively small minority in Pakistan, though Pakistan’s 
Pashtun population is considerably larger than Afghanistan’s.  
70 Pakistan, the United Nations, and others recognize the 1893 Durand Line as an international boundary, but 
Afghanistan does not. See Vinay Kaura, “The Durand Line: A British Legacy Plaguing Afghan-Pakistani Relations,” 
Middle East Institute, June 27, 2017. 
71 Rezaul Laskar, “In a huge shift, India opens channels with Afghan Taliban factions and leaders,” Hindustan Times, 
June 9, 2021. 
72 Humayun Hamidzada and Richard Ponzio, Central Asia’s Growing Role in Building Peace and Regional 
Connectivity with Afghanistan, United States Institute of Peace, August 2019. 

Congressional Research Service  

10 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Taliban from Russia and Iran, both of which have cited the Islamic State affiliate presence in 
Afghanistan to justify their activities. Both were reported in 2020 to have been more directly 
involved, including possibly supporting Taliban attacks against U.S. forces.73 Both nations were 
opposed to the Taliban government of the late 1990s, but reportedly see the Taliban as a useful 
point of leverage vis-à-vis the United States. Afghanistan may also represent a growing priority 
for China in the context of broader Chinese aspirations in Asia and globally.74  

Economy and U.S. Aid 
In addition to its long-standing military presence, the United States has provided considerable 
development assistance to Afghanistan. Since FY2002, Congress has appropriated approximately 
$144 billion in overall aid for Afghanistan, with about 61% for security and 25% for governance 
and development (with the remaining 14% for civilian operations and humanitarian aid).75 DOD’s 
quarterly Cost of War report estimated the cost of U.S. combat operations (including related 
regional support activities and support for Afghan forces) as of December 2020 at $824.9 billion 
since FY2002.  

The U.S. military withdrawal could affect the level and types of assistance the United States may 
provide to Afghanistan. Some Members have raised concerns that a withdrawal might impair the 
United States’ ability to monitor the distribution and effectiveness of U.S. aid, a long-standing 
U.S. concern.76 Additionally, the number of personnel present in Afghanistan under Chief of 
Mission authority (mostly State Department or USAID personnel) declined steadily during the 
Trump Administration and significantly after the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) 
pandemic began. 

Furthermore, U.S. assistance may affect, and in turn be affected by, intra-Afghan talks and a 
potential settlement. Special Representative Khalilzad said in September 2020 congressional 
testimony that “we are committed for the long term in terms of providing assistance to 
Afghanistan,” but that U.S. decisions would depend on the outcome of Afghan negotiations, as 
other U.S. officials have emphasized.77 The appropriation of assistance funding remains a 
congressional prerogative. It is unclear to what extent (if at all) the prospect of changes to U.S. 
and international financial assistance might put pressure on or create U.S. leverage over the 
behavior and policies of the Taliban or the Afghan government.78 

U.S. and international development assistance could become more critical if a U.S. and allied 
military withdrawal further weakens Afghanistan’s economy, already among the world’s smallest. 

73 Charlie Savage, Eric Schmitt and Michael Schwirtz, “Russia Secretly Offered Afghan Militants Bounties to Kill U.S. 
Troops, Intelligence Says,” New York Times, June 26, 2020. Additionally, in October 2018, the Trump Administration 
sanctioned several Iranian military officials for providing support to the Taliban. U.S. Department of the Treasury, 
Treasury and the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center Partners Sanction Taliban Facilitators and their Iranian 
Supporters, October 23, 2018. 
74 See, for example, Barbara Kelemen, “China’s Economic Stabilization Efforts in Afghanistan: A New Party to the 
Table?” Middle East Institute, January 21, 2020. 
75 SIGAR, Quarterly Report to the United States Congress, April 30, 2020. 
76 See Senator Reed’s remarks at Senate Armed Service Committee Hearing on U.S. Central Command, February 5, 
2019. 
77 House Oversight and Reform Subcommittee on National Security Holds Hearing on Afghanistan Strategy, 
September 22, 2020. For example, Secretary Pompeo told intra-Afghan negotiators in Doha that their “choices and 
conduct will affect both the size and scope of United States future assistance.” 
78 For more, see Live Event: What Does the Taliban Want?, Wilson Center, October 6, 2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

11 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Afghanistan’s gross domestic product (GDP) has grown an average of 7% per year since 2003, 
but growth rates averaged between 2% and 3% in recent years and decades of war have stunted 
the development of most domestic industries. President Ghani said in July 2020 that 90% of 
Afghans live below the government-determined poverty level of two dollars a day.79 The 
withdrawal of a U.S. force much smaller than that of a decade ago would seem to have less 
dramatic second-order economic effects for Afghanistan than did the post-2012 drawdown, which 
helped spur a “drastic economic decline.”80 Still, the proposed withdrawal could pose risks for an 
Afghan economy suffering the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has infected tens of 
thousands of Afghans (a figure likely understates the scale of the virus in Afghanistan due to 
extremely limited testing).81  

Afghanistan’s largely underdeveloped natural resources and/or geographic position at the 
crossroads of future global trade routes could improve the economic life of the country, and, by 
extension, its social and political dynamics. Nevertheless, Afghanistan’s economic outlook 
remains uncertain, if not negative, in light of the prospective decrease in U.S. and international 
investment and engagement. 

Outlook and Issues for Congress 
President Biden’s April 2021 announcement of his intention to fully withdraw U.S. forces by 
September 11, 2021, drew praise and criticism from some Members of Congress, who have long 
debated the relative costs and benefits of the U.S. military presence in Afghanistan. Some 
welcomed the announcement, citing what they characterize as U.S. counterterrorism successes or 
a need to reprioritize U.S. global interests.82 Other Members urged President Biden to reconsider 
in favor of a conditions-based approach.83 Longstanding competing desires among some in 
Congress to both end “forever wars” and preserve the gains in Afghanistan achieved in part by 
considerable U.S. sacrifice could shape congressional oversight of Biden Administration policy as 
the Administration plans to end the nearly two-decade-long U.S. military presence later in 2021.  

Going forward, congressional attention on Afghanistan may center on U.S. assistance, 
specifically what levels and conditions can best achieve U.S. policy priorities. In the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2021 (P.L. 116-260), Congress makes certain funds available for a range of 
activities in Afghanistan, including programs that combat corruption, support higher education, 
and protect the rights of Afghan women and girls. It also prohibits the use of funds pursuant to 
limits first imposed in the FY2019 appropriations act, including limits on funding for projects that 
the Afghan government cannot sustain or that are inaccessible for effective oversight. These 
conditions may become more challenging if security conditions deteriorate after a U.S. 
withdrawal. Congress has also appropriated considerable funds for Afghan security forces. 

More broadly, it is unclear to what extent, if at all, U.S. foreign assistance might encourage the 
Taliban to accept key elements of Afghanistan’s constitution and post-2001 governance; many 
U.S. policymakers view Afghanistan’s democratic system, even with its considerable flaws, as a 

79 Anisa Shaheed, “Ghani’s Afghan Poverty Estimate ‘Catastrophic’: Analysts,” TOLOnews, July 20, 2020. 
80 “The Economic Disaster Behind Afghanistan’s Mounting Human Crisis,” International Crisis Group, October 3, 
2016. 
81 World Health Organization, “WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard,” June 9, 2021. 
82 Representative Andy Kim, “Congressman Kim Statement on Announcement of U.S. Troop Withdrawal from 
Afghanistan,” April 13, 2021; Senator Ed Markey (@SenMarkey), Twitter, April 13, 2021, 1:29PM. 
83 Senator Jim Inhofe (@JimInhofe), Twitter, April 13, 2021, 1:26PM.  

Congressional Research Service  

12 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

success of U.S. and international efforts. Official views of the Taliban’s stance vary. Some 
Administration officials assert the Taliban say that they want international assistance.84 In 
contrast, a recently declassified National Intelligence Council (NIC) assessment stated that while 
the “Taliban’s desires for foreign aid and legitimacy might marginally moderate its conduct over 
time,” at least initially “the Taliban probably would focus on extending control on its own 
terms.”85 The NIC assessed that Taliban control would “roll back much of the two decades’ of 
progress” given the Taliban’s “restrictive approach to women’s rights.” Some Members of 
Congress have expressed an intention not to support assistance for Afghanistan if the Taliban re-
enter power and roll back women’s rights.86 Conversely, Congress might also consider sanctions 
as possible leverage, given the potential for U.S. sanctions to deny needed foreign investment to a 
potential future Afghan government that includes or is dominated by the Taliban. How 
Afghanistan fits into broader U.S. strategy is another issue on which Members might engage, 
especially given competing fiscal priorities in light of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as 
competing U.S. policy priorities.87 

Author Information 

Clayton Thomas 
Analyst in Middle Eastern Affairs 

Disclaimer 

This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan 
shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and 
under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other 
than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in 
connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not 
subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in 
its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or 
material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to 
copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

84 Secretary Antony J. Blinken At a Press Availability, Department of State, April 15, 2021. 
85 NIC, Afghanistan: Women’s Economic, Political, Social Status Driven by Cultural Norms, April 2, 2021. 
86 Rachel Oswald, “U.S. foreign aid will be cut off it Taliban take power, senators say,” Roll Call, April 27, 2021. 
87 See, for example, CRS Report R43838, Renewed Great Power Competition: Implications for Defense—Issues for 
Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. 

Congressional Research Service  

R45122 · VERSION 46 · UPDATED 

13 

 
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
                                                 
