Costa Rica: An Overview

Costa Rica historically has been an outpost of political and 
economic stability in an often-turbulent region. The United 
States has worked closely with Costa Rica to address 
challenges in Central America and to advance shared 
values, such as democracy and human rights, worldwide. 

Political Situation 
Costa Rica has sustained continuous civilian democratic 
governance since 1949, when the country adopted a new 
constitution in the aftermath of a short civil war. The 
center-left (now centrist) National Liberation Party (PLN) 
and a center-right opposition that ultimately became the 
Social Christian Unity Party (PUSC) dominated post-war 
politics. The two-party system has collapsed over the past 
20 years, however, as many Costa Ricans have grown 
disenchanted with the country’s political class and have 
abandoned the traditional parties. This shift has allowed 
newer political forces to contest power, such as the center-
left Citizens’ Action Party (PAC), which has won the past 
two presidential elections. It also has contributed to 
legislative gridlock, making governance more challenging. 

President Carlos Alvarado of the PAC took office for a 
four-year term in May 2018 after winning 61% of the vote 
in a second-round runoff. He has had to forge multiparty 
alliances to advance his agenda through the unicameral 
Legislative Assembly, in which the PAC holds 10 of 57 
seats. During Alvarado’s term, Costa Rica has legalized 
same-sex marriage, enacted structural reforms required for 
admission into the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development, and begun implementing a plan to 
reduce net carbon emissions to zero by 2050. Other portions 
of Alvarado’s agenda have stalled due to fiscal constraints 
and the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic.  

Costa Rica has been more successful than many Latin 
American countries in containing COVID-19. Nevertheless, 
Costa Rica experienced two large infection waves between 
April and October 2021, which analysts attributed to the 
spread of the Delta variant and a relaxation of public health 
restrictions. According to Johns Hopkins University, as of 
January 1, 2022, Costa Rica had recorded more than 
570,000 cases and 7,300 deaths from COVID-19 and 69% 
of its population was fully vaccinated. 

With the exception of a short period early in the pandemic, 
Costa Ricans have expressed low levels of approval for 
Alvarado throughout his term. A November 2021 
University of Costa Rica (UCR) poll found that 12% of 
Costa Ricans viewed Alvarado’s performance in office 
positively, 72% viewed it negatively, and 16% held neutral 
opinions. Those surveyed identified corruption, 
unemployment, and the cost of living as their top concerns.  

Updated January 3, 2022

Costa Rica’s next presidential and legislative elections are 
scheduled for February 6, 2022. Alvarado is not eligible for 
immediate reelection. A December 2021 UCR poll found 
former President José María Figueres (1994-1999) of the 
PLN and former Vice President Lineth Saborío (2002-
2006) of the PUSC leading a large field of presidential 
candidates, with 17% and 15% of vote intentions, 
respectively. More than 40% of voters remained undecided. 
If no presidential candidate receives at least 40% of the 
vote, a runoff is to be held on April 3, 2022. 

Figure 1. Costa Rica at a Glance 

Sources: CRS Graphics, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos; 
Universidad de Costa Rica, Centro de Investigación y Estudios 
Políticos; International Monetary Fund; Trade Data Monitor. 

Economic and Social Conditions 
Costa Rica pursued state-led economic development 
throughout much of the 20th century but began to adopt a 
more market-oriented economic strategy in the 1980s. Over 
the past three decades, Costa Rica has attracted a cluster of 
high-tech manufacturers, such as medical device 
companies, and has developed a dynamic tourism sector, 
contributing to the diversification of the country’s once 
predominantly agricultural economy. These newer 
industries provide higher wages, but many Costa Ricans 
remain employed in traditional industries, which struggle to 
compete with imports and provide lower pay and precarious 
employment conditions. This divergence has reinforced 
Costa Rica’s relatively high level of income inequality. It 
also has contributed to high rates of unemployment and 
informal employment, eroding the tax base necessary to 
sustain Costa Rica’s social welfare system.  

Socioeconomic conditions in Costa Rica deteriorated 
considerably in 2020. Although the government enacted 
emergency measures to support businesses and households 
through the pandemic, the economy contracted by 4.1% and 
the poverty rate increased from 24% to 30%. The 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates the Costa 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 
 
Rican economy bounced back with 3.9% growth in 2021, 
helping to reduce the poverty rate to 26%. Nevertheless, 
more than 15% of Costa Ricans remained unemployed in 
the third quarter of 2021. 

The economic downturn also exacerbated Costa Rica’s 
fiscal challenges, as the budget deficit widened to 8.7% of 
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2020. The Alvarado 
administration negotiated a three-year, $1.8 billion 
financing arrangement with the IMF intended to support 
Costa Rica’s economic recovery while stabilizing the 
country’s debt burden. Costa Rica’s budget deficit fell to an 
estimated 6.4% of GDP in 2021, but the government’s 
fiscal policies have sparked repeated protests and the 
implementation of additional austerity measures could 
generate further unrest. 

U.S.-Costa Rican Relations 
The Biden Administration has sought to bolster ties with 
Costa Rica. During a June 2021 visit to the country, U.S. 
Secretary of State Antony Blinken highlighted bilateral 
economic and security cooperation as well as U.S.-Costa 
Rican collaboration to address shared challenges such as the 
COVID-19 pandemic, irregular migration, and climate 
change. The Administration also has expressed support for 
the Alliance for Development in Democracy—an informal 
arrangement among Costa Rica, Panama, and the 
Dominican Republic intended to accelerate post-pandemic 
economic recovery, foster sustainable development, and 
defend democracy and human rights in the region. 

Trade and Investment Ties 
The United States and Costa Rica are parties to the 
Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR), which was signed in 2004 
and entered into force for Costa Rica in 2009. Bilateral 
trade more than doubled between 2008 and 2012 but 
declined 43% between 2012 and 2020, largely due to a 
steep drop in U.S. imports following Intel’s 2014 closure of 
a microprocessor manufacturing plant in Costa Rica. U.S.-
Costa Rican trade totaled $11 billion in 2020, a 3% decline 
compared with 2019. U.S. goods exports to Costa Rica 
amounted to $5.7 billion and U.S. goods imports from 
Costa Rica amounted to $5.4 billion in 2020, giving the 
United States a $331 million trade surplus. Top U.S. 
exports to Costa Rica in 2020 included mineral fuels, 
machinery and parts, medical instruments and equipment, 
and plastics; top U.S. imports from Costa Rica in 2020 
included medical instruments and equipment, fruit, electric 
machinery and parts, and coffee. 

CAFTA-DR includes a chapter on investment that is similar 
to a bilateral investment treaty. According to the U.S. 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, the accumulated stock of 
U.S. foreign direct investment in Costa Rica was $2 billion 
in 2020, with 45% invested in the manufacturing sector. 

Security Cooperation 
Costa Rica’s institutions have proven more resilient than 
those of its Central American neighbors, but the country has 
experienced an increase in organized crime and related 
violence over the past decade. Costa Rica recorded 588 
homicides in 2021, giving it a homicide rate of 11.4 per 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

100,000 residents. Costa Rican authorities have linked 
much of the violence to drug trafficking organizations, 
which use the country as a transit and storage point for 
South American cocaine destined for the U.S. market. Drug 
trafficking organizations also have sought to infiltrate Costa 
Rican institutions, contributing to increased corruption in 
the justice sector, according to the U.S. State Department. 

The United States provides foreign assistance to Costa Rica 
to help the country combat transnational crime and other 
security threats. In the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 
2021 (P.L. 116-260), Congress appropriated $40.7 million 
of security assistance for Costa Rica. That total included 
$8.2 million in bilateral military aid and $32.5 million 
through the Central America Regional Security Initiative. 
The U.S. Department of Defense has provided additional 
support to Costa Rica, including $3.7 million for maritime 
interdiction in FY2020. U.S. assistance has helped Costa 
Rica expand community-based crime prevention programs, 
train security and justice sector personnel, and acquire 
equipment used to monitor and control its national territory.  

COVID-19 
President Alvarado has repeatedly called on the 
international community to help developing countries 
obtain COVID-19 vaccines and recover from the pandemic. 
In July 2021, the United States donated 500,000 doses of 
the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine to Costa Rica. The United 
States also has provided more than $4 million of pandemic-
related aid to Costa Rica, including field hospitals and other 
medical supplies. 

Migration and Refugee Flows 
As a comparatively prosperous and stable country, Costa 
Rica has long served as a destination for migrants and 
asylum-seekers from other Latin American nations. The 
country has experienced a recent surge in asylum requests, 
however, primarily due to the ongoing political crisis in 
neighboring Nicaragua. According to the U.N. Refugee 
Agency, more than 85,000 Nicaraguans have sought asylum 
in Costa Rica since 2018. Costa Rica also has experienced 
increasing inflows of migrants and asylum-seekers from 
Venezuela, El Salvador, and Honduras. 

The Costa Rican government has sought to provide 
protection and humanitarian aid to those in need but has 
called on the international community for additional 
support. According to the U.S. Agency for International 
Development, the United States provided nearly $14.2 
million to humanitarian organizations in FY2021 to support 
migrants, asylum-seekers, and refugees in Costa Rica. 

In addition to those who have sought refuge in Costa Rica, 
many migrants pass through Costa Rican territory on their 
way to the United States. In recent years, such transitory 
flows have included large numbers of Cubans and Haitians, 
as well as extra-regional migrants from Africa and Asia. 
Costa Rica has worked with the U.S. government to 
conduct background checks on those transiting the country 
and to identify and respond to potential security threats 
before they reach the U.S. border.

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

Peter J. Meyer, Specialist in Latin American and Canadian 
Affairs   

IF10908

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10908 · VERSION 6 · UPDATED 

 
 
 
 
