Costa Rica: An Overview

Costa Rica historically has been a bastion of political and 
economic stability in an often-turbulent region. The United 
States has worked closely with Costa Rica to address 
challenges in Central America and to advance shared 
values, such as democracy and human rights, worldwide. 

Political Situation 
Costa Rica has sustained civilian democratic governance 
since 1949, when the country adopted a new constitution in 
the aftermath of a short civil war. The center-left (now 
centrist) National Liberation Party (PLN) and a center-right 
opposition that ultimately became the Social Christian 
Unity Party (PUSC) dominated post-war politics. The two-
party system has collapsed over the past 20 years, however, 
as many discontented Costa Ricans have abandoned the 
traditional parties. This shift has allowed newer political 
forces to contest power, such as the center-left Citizens’ 
Action Party (PAC), which won the 2014 and 2018 
presidential elections, and the center-right Social 
Democratic Progress Party (PPSD), which won the 2022 
presidential election. It also has contributed to legislative 
fragmentation, making governance more challenging. 

Carlos Alvarado of the PAC served as president from May 
2018 to May 2022. During his term, Costa Rica legalized 
same-sex marriage, enacted structural reforms to join the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) in 2021, and began to implement a plan to reduce 
net carbon emissions to zero by 2050. Other portions of 
Alvarado’s agenda stalled due to fiscal constraints, the 
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, and a 
lack of support in the unicameral Legislative Assembly. 
Costa Ricans generally expressed low levels of approval for 
Alvarado throughout his presidency; a March 2022 
University of Costa Rica poll found that 18% of Costa 
Ricans viewed his presidency favorably. 

Rodrigo Chaves, a former Costa Rican finance minister and 
World Bank official, was elected to succeed Alvarado, 
securing 53% of the vote in an April 2022 runoff election 
against former President José María Figueres (1994-1998) 
of the PLN. Some 43% of the population abstained from the 
vote after an acrimonious campaign, in which Chaves 
harshly criticized the traditional political class as corrupt 
and ineffectual while personally facing allegations of sexual 
harassment and campaign finance irregularities. Chaves 
promised to “rebuild” the nation in his May 2022 
inauguration speech, indicating his major priorities include 
reviving the economy, streamlining government operations, 
reducing the cost of living, and combatting corruption and 
crime. The new president may struggle to move his agenda 
through the Legislative Assembly, in which his PPSD holds 
10 of 57 seats. Although Chaves has asserted that he could 
bypass the legislature with popular referenda, the 

Updated May 27, 2022

constitution prohibits such initiatives from addressing 
budget, tax, pension, or security policies. 

Figure 1. Costa Rica at a Glance 

Sources: CRS Graphics, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos; 
Universidad de Costa Rica, Centro de Investigación y Estudios 
Políticos; International Monetary Fund; Trade Data Monitor. 

Economic and Social Conditions 
Costa Rica pursued state-led economic development 
throughout much of the 20th century but began to adopt a 
more market-oriented economic strategy in the 1980s. Since 
that time, Costa Rica has attracted a cluster of high-tech 
manufacturers, including medical device companies, and 
has developed a dynamic tourism sector, contributing to the 
diversification of the country’s once predominantly 
agricultural economy. These newer industries provide 
higher wages, but many Costa Ricans remain employed in 
traditional industries, which struggle to compete with 
imports and provide lower pay and precarious working 
conditions. This divergence has reinforced Costa Rica’s 
relatively high level of income inequality. It also has 
contributed to rising levels of unemployment and informal 
employment, eroding the tax base necessary to sustain 
Costa Rica’s social welfare system. 

Socioeconomic and public health conditions deteriorated in 
Costa Rica in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic but 
have begun to recover. Although the Costa Rican 
government enacted emergency measures to support 
businesses and households through the pandemic, the 
economy contracted by 4.1% and the poverty rate increased 
from 24% in 2019 to 30% in 2020. Costa Rica registered a 
7.6% economic growth rate in 2021, which helped reduce 
the poverty rate to 26%. According to Johns Hopkins 
University, as of May 27, 2022, Costa Rica had recorded 
nearly 8,500 COVID-19 deaths (167 per 100,000 people) 
and more than 81% of the population was fully vaccinated.  

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 
 
The pandemic-driven economic downturn also exacerbated 
Costa Rica’s fiscal challenges, as the budget deficit 
widened to 8.4% of GDP in 2020. The Alvarado 
administration negotiated a three-year, $1.8 billion 
financing arrangement with the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) intended to support Costa Rica’s economic 
recovery while stabilizing the country’s debt burden. The 
budget deficit fell to 5.1% of GDP in 2021, and IMF 
officials agreed to extend the arrangement by five months 
(until July 2024) in March 2022. Chaves has vowed to 
renegotiate the terms of the IMF agreement to reflect 
changing global dynamics and his policy priorities. 

The IMF forecasts 3.3% economic growth for Costa Rica in 
2022, aided by widespread vaccination and sustained 
exports. The effects of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine could 
slow Costa Rica’s recovery, however, by contributing to 
rising fuel prices and tighter global financial conditions. 

U.S.-Costa Rican Relations 
The Biden Administration has sought to bolster ties with 
Costa Rica. In April 2022, the State Department 
congratulated Chaves on his election and expressed interest 
in working with the new government to advance common 
interests, including humane migration management and 
environmental protection. The Biden Administration also 
has expressed support for the Alliance for Development in 
Democracy—an informal arrangement among Costa Rica, 
Panama, and the Dominican Republic intended to accelerate 
post-pandemic economic recovery, foster sustainable 
development, and defend democracy and human rights 
throughout the region. The United States has donated 1.5 
million COVID-19 vaccine doses and more than $4 million 
in other pandemic-related aid to Costa Rica. 

Trade and Investment Ties 
The United States and Costa Rica are parties to the 
Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR), which was signed in 2004 
and entered into force for Costa Rica in 2009. Bilateral 
trade more than doubled between 2008 and 2012 but 
declined 43% between 2012 and 2020, largely due to a 
steep drop in U.S. imports following Intel’s 2014 closure of 
a microprocessor manufacturing plant in Costa Rica. U.S.-
Costa Rican trade totaled $13.8 billion in 2021, a 25% 
increase from 2020 levels. U.S. goods exports to Costa Rica 
amounted to $7.3 billion and U.S. goods imports from 
Costa Rica amounted to $6.5 billion in 2021, giving the 
United States a $774 million trade surplus. Top U.S. 
exports to Costa Rica in 2021 included mineral fuels, 
electronic machinery and parts, and medical equipment; top 
U.S. imports from Costa Rica in 2021 included medical 
equipment, fruit, and electric machinery and parts. 

CAFTA-DR includes a chapter on investment that is similar 
to a bilateral investment treaty. According to the U.S. 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, the accumulated stock of 
U.S. foreign direct investment in Costa Rica was $2 billion 
in 2020, with 45% invested in the manufacturing sector. 

Security Cooperation 
Costa Rica’s institutions have proven more resilient than 
those of its Central American neighbors, but the country has 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

experienced an increase in organized crime and violence 
over the past decade. Costa Rica recorded 588 homicides in 
2021, giving it a homicide rate of 11.4 per 100,000 
residents. Costa Rican authorities have linked much of the 
violence to drug trafficking organizations, which use the 
country as a transit and storage point for South American 
cocaine destined for the U.S. market. Drug trafficking 
organizations also have sought to infiltrate Costa Rican 
institutions, contributing to increased corruption in the 
justice sector, according to the U.S. State Department. 

The United States provides foreign assistance to Costa Rica 
to help the country combat transnational crime and other 
security threats. In the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 
2022 (P.L. 117-103), Congress appropriated $40.7 million 
of security assistance for Costa Rica. That total includes 
$8.2 million in bilateral aid and $32.5 million provided 
through the Central America Regional Security Initiative. 
U.S. assistance has helped Costa Rica expand community-
based crime prevention programs, train security and justice 
sector personnel, and acquire equipment. For FY2023, the 
Biden Administration has requested $600,000 to train Costa 
Rican security forces. In May 2022, the State Department 
offered a $10 million reward for information on leaders of 
Conti, a Russian hacking group that has carried out a far-
reaching cyberattack against the Costa Rican government. 

Migration and Refugee Flows 
As a comparatively prosperous and stable country, Costa 
Rica has long served as a destination for migrants and 
asylum-seekers from other Latin American nations. The 
country has experienced a recent surge in asylum requests, 
however, primarily due to the ongoing political crisis in 
neighboring Nicaragua. According to the U.N. Refugee 
Agency, more than 150,000 Nicaraguans have sought 
asylum in Costa Rica. Costa Rica also has experienced 
increasing inflows of migrants and asylum-seekers from 
Venezuela, El Salvador, and Honduras. 

The Costa Rican government has sought to provide 
protection and humanitarian aid to those in need but has 
called on the international community for additional 
support. According to the U.S. Agency for International 
Development, the United States provided nearly $14.2 
million to humanitarian organizations in FY2021 to support 
migrants, asylum-seekers, and refugees in Costa Rica. 

In addition to those who have sought refuge in Costa Rica, 
many migrants pass through Costa Rican territory on their 
way to the United States. In recent years, such transitory 
flows have included large numbers of Cubans and Haitians, 
as well as extra-regional migrants from Africa and Asia. 
Costa Rica has worked with the U.S. government to 
conduct background checks on those transiting the country 
and to identify and respond to potential security threats 
before they reach the U.S. border. During a March 2022 
visit by U.S. Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro 
Mayorkas, the United States and Costa Rica signed a 
migration collaboration agreement focused on combatting 
migrant smuggling and human trafficking and improving 
migrant integration and protection programs.

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

Peter J. Meyer, Specialist in Latin American and Canadian 
Affairs   

Costa Rica: An Overview 

Joshua Klein, Presidential Management Fellow   

IF10908

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10908 · VERSION 7 · UPDATED 

 
 
 
 
