Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: 
In Brief 

Updated August 26, 2022 

Congressional Research Service 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

R45122 

 
 
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: 
In Brief 

Even by the standards of Afghanistan’s tumultuous history, 2021 marked a major watershed for 
the country. In 2021, U.S. and international forces departed after nearly two decades of 
operations in Afghanistan; the internationally backed Afghan government and its military forces 
collapsed; and the Taliban, a Sunni Islamist extremist group that formerly ruled the country from 
1996 to 2001, retook power. The aftershocks of these events continue to reverberate within 
Afghanistan, throughout its region, and in the United States as Afghans and U.S. policymakers 
alike grapple with the reality of the Taliban’s renewed rule.  

SUMMARY 

R45122 

August 26, 2022 

Clayton Thomas 
Specialist in Middle 
Eastern Affairs 

The chapter of Afghan history that ended in 2021 arguably began in 2001, when the United States, in response to the terrorist 
attacks of September 11, 2001, led a military campaign against Al Qaeda and the Afghan Taliban government that harbored 
and supported it. In the subsequent 20 years, the United States suffered over 22,000 military casualties (including about 2,400 
fatalities) in Afghanistan, mostly at the hands of the rising Taliban insurgency, and Congress appropriated over $146 billion 
for reconstruction and security forces there. During this same period, an elected Afghan government replaced the Taliban 
and, with significant U.S. and international support, made modest but uneven improvements in most measures of human 
development, though Afghanistan remained one of the world’s poorest and most corrupt countries.  

In February 2020, Trump Administration officials signed an agreement with the Taliban in which the United States 
committed to the withdrawal of all international military forces by May 2021, in return for which the Taliban committed to 
prevent other groups (including Al Qaeda) from using Afghan soil to threaten the United States. Amid increased violence 
between the Taliban and Afghan government and continuing Taliban links with Al Qaeda, the Trump Administration drew 
down U.S. forces to a low of 2,500 in January 2021. Several months later, President Joseph Biden announced that the United 
States would complete the troop withdrawal by September 2021. On August 15, 2021, two weeks before that withdrawal was 
to conclude, the Taliban entered Kabul, the culmination of a rapid nationwide military advance that shocked many in the 
United States and Afghanistan. In the last two weeks of August, U.S. military forces oversaw the evacuation of over 120,000 
individuals, including U.S. and international diplomatic personnel and Afghan partners, from Kabul’s international airport, 
before departing on August 30, 2021. No U.S. military or diplomatic personnel are in Afghanistan as of August 2022. 

The Taliban announced the formation of a new government dominated by Taliban loyalists on September 7, 2021. The 
composition of that government and the Taliban’s suppression of peaceful protests against its rule indicate the group has 
prioritized internal cohesion over outreach to other segments of Afghan society or similar gestures advocated by the United 
States and other countries. Some anti-Taliban Afghans have sought U.S. support and have claimed guerilla-style attacks 
against Taliban forces. However, the regional Islamic State affiliate may pose a more potent threat to the Taliban.  

Members of Congress have focused on a number of impacts of the Taliban’s renewed rule, including the status of the Islamic 
State, Al Qaeda, and U.S. efforts to counter these groups “over the horizon.” Taliban actions have been detrimental for the 
status of women and girls in Afghanistan, a longtime U.S. policy concern, with girls prohibited from attending school at the 
secondary level and women’s roles curtailed. The status of ethnic and religious minorities, as well as the tens of thousands of 
Afghans who worked for U.S. efforts and seek to leave the country, also remain closely scrutinized by U.S. policymakers. 
The Taliban’s return to power also has implications for Afghanistan’s neighbors and regional dynamics more broadly. 

Since the Taliban takeover, Afghanistan has faced intersecting and overwhelming humanitarian and economic crises, a result 
of challenges both pre-existing (such as natural disasters and Afghanistan’s weak economic base) and new (such as the cut-
off of international development assistance, U.S. sanctions on the Taliban, and the U.S. hold on Afghan central bank assets). 
The Biden Administration and many in Congress seek to ameliorate these crises, but without taking any action that boosts the 
Taliban’s position or that may be perceived as doing so. Pursuing these policies in tandem may prove complicated given the 
Taliban’s evident aversion to make compromises in response to international pressure and its apparent willingness to accept 
considerable humanitarian and economic suffering as the price of that uncompromising stance.  

Congressional oversight of U.S. Afghanistan policy has featured numerous hearings, past and ongoing investigations, and the 
creation of the Afghanistan War Commission. Congress has also imposed a variety of reporting requirements to monitor 
dynamics in Afghanistan and their implications for U.S. policy. Congress may consider further reporting requirements as it 
evaluates the Biden Administration’s FY2023 budget request and defense authorization measures.  

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Contents 

Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 
Background: Taliban Takeover ........................................................................................................ 1 
Taliban Government ........................................................................................................................ 2 
Current and Potential Opposition .............................................................................................. 3 
U.S. Policy Impacts of the Taliban’s Return to Power .............................................................. 4 
Counterterrorism ................................................................................................................. 4 
Human Rights: Focus on Women and Ethnic and Religious Minorities ............................. 6 
Ongoing Relocations of U.S. Citizens and Certain Afghans .............................................. 7 
Economic Collapse, Humanitarian Crisis, and U.S. Policy ............................................................. 9 
Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors ..................................................................... 10 
Congressional Action and Outlook ................................................................................................ 12 

Contacts 

Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 14 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Introduction 
The aftershocks of the Taliban’s August 2021 return to power continue to reverberate in 
Afghanistan and the United States alike. This report provides background information and 
analysis on developments in Afghanistan and implications for U.S. policy, including 

 

 
 

the Taliban’s government and the impact of their rule on terrorist groups, human 
rights, and the ability of U.S. Afghan partners to leave the country;  

regional dynamics; and  
the intersecting humanitarian and economic crises facing the country. 

The report also provides information on legislation and other congressional action related to 
Afghanistan. The challenge at the heart of many U.S. policy debates over which Congress has 
influence (including humanitarian assistance, U.S. sanctions, and the status of U.S.-based central 
bank assets) is how to prioritize and, if possible, reconcile two U.S. interests: supporting the 
Afghan people and refraining from bolstering the Taliban’s rule.  

Background: Taliban Takeover 
At the outset of 2021, the Afghan government was a close U.S. counterterrorism partner, the 
result of nearly 20 years of substantial U.S. and international support, including the deployment 
of hundreds of thousands of troops and the provision of tens of billions of dollars in assistance. 
President Donald Trump had withdrawn all but 2,500 U.S. troops, the lowest U.S. force level 
since 2001, in advance of the full military withdrawal to which the United States agreed in the 
February 2020 U.S.-Taliban agreement.1 U.S. officials committed to continue to provide financial 
support to Afghan forces and expressed confidence about their capabilities vis-a-vis the Taliban, 
while conceding that those forces remained reliant on U.S. support.2 

At the same time, the Taliban were arguably at their strongest since 2001, when they were driven 
from power by U.S., international, and U.S.-backed Afghan forces, having steadily gained 
territory and improved their tactical capabilities over the course of their resilient two-decade 
insurgency. The Afghan government against which the Taliban fought was weakened by deep 
internal divisions, factional infighting, and endemic corruption, and Taliban forces enjoyed 
certain advantages over their Afghan government counterparts, including greater cohesion and 
financial sustainability, according to one January 2021 outside assessment.3 

Several weeks after President Joseph Biden confirmed that international forces would depart 
Afghanistan by the fall of 2021, Taliban forces began a sweeping advance that captured wide 
swaths of the country’s rural areas, cementing the group’s hold on some districts in which it 
already had a significant presence. The Taliban’s seizure of other districts was more surprising: 

1 After more than a year of negotiations, U.S. and Taliban representatives signed a bilateral agreement on February 29, 
2020, agreeing to two “interconnected” “guarantees”: the withdrawal of all U.S. and international forces by May 2021, 
and unspecified Taliban action to prevent other groups (including Al Qaeda) from using Afghan soil to threaten the 
United States and its allies. The text of the agreement is available at https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/
02/Agreement-For-Bringing-Peace-to-Afghanistan-02.29.20.pdf. Nonpublic annexes accompanied the agreement. 
2 See House Oversight and Reform Subcommittee on National Security Holds Hearing on Pathway for Peace in 
Afghanistan, CQ Congressional Transcripts, February 19, 2021. 
3 Jonathan Schroden, “Afghanistan’s Security Forces Versus the Taliban: A Net Assessment,” CTC Sentinel, January 
2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

1 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

some northern areas had successfully resisted the Taliban militarily when the group was in power 
in the 1990s, making their rapid 2021 fall to the Taliban particularly significant.4 The speed of the 
Taliban’s advance reportedly surprised even some within the group, with one commander saying 
that his forces were intentionally avoiding capturing provincial capitals before the scheduled 
departure of U.S. forces.5 

The Taliban’s advance was secured through both combat and negotiation. While the Taliban faced 
stiff, if ultimately unsuccessful, resistance from government forces in some areas, others were 
taken with minimal fighting.6 In many of these areas, the Taliban reportedly secured the surrender 
or departure of government forces (and the handover of their weapons) with payments or through 
the mediation of local elders seeking to avoid bloodshed.7 The Taliban captured their first 
provincial capital on August 6, after which the collapse of the Afghan government and its security 
forces accelerated. Afghan President Ashraf Ghani, whose seven-year tenure was characterized by 
electoral crises, pervasive corruption, and the gradual deterioration of Afghan forces, fled the 
country on August 15 and reportedly remains, as of August 2022, in the United Arab Emirates.8 
Taliban fighters began entering Kabul that same day, taking effective control of the country. 

Taliban Government 
On September 7, 2021, the Taliban announced a “caretaker government” to rule Afghanistan. The 
Taliban refer to their government, as they have for decades referred to themselves, as the Islamic 
Emirate of Afghanistan.9 The Taliban, who did not enact a formal constitution during their 1996-
2001 rule, have said they intend to govern according to Islamic law (sharia) but have not 
established “a clear and cohesive legal framework, judicial system, or enforcement 
mechanisms.”10 

Haibatullah Akhundzada, Taliban leader since the 2016 killing of his predecessor in a U.S. drone 
strike, holds supreme power as the group’s emir. He has made few reported public appearances 
and only one photograph of him is known to be publicly available.11 Nearly all members of the 
government are former officials from the Taliban’s prior rule or longtime loyalists. All are male, 
the vast majority are ethnic Pashtuns (Afghanistan’s largest ethnic group, which represents a 
plurality of the population), and most are from southern Afghanistan. Over half were, and remain, 
designated for terrorism-related U.S. and/or U.N. sanctions, including the Acting Interior 

4 Kate Clark and Obaid Ali, “A Quarter of Afghanistan’s Districts Fall to the Taleban amid Calls for a ‘Second 
Resistance,’” Afghanistan Analysts Network, July 2, 2021. 
5 Dan De Luce, Mushtaq Yusufzai, and Saphora Smith, “Even the Taliban are surprised at how fast they’re advancing 
in Afghanistan,” NBC News, June 25, 2021. 
6 “Afghanistan: Taliban continue attacks on three major cities,” BBC, August 1, 2021. 
7 Susannah George, “Afghanistan’s military collapse: Illicit deals and mass desertions,” Washington Post, August 15, 
2021; David Zucchino, “Collapse and Conquest: The Taliban Strategy That Seized Afghanistan,” New York Times, 
August 18, 2021. 
8 Charles Davis, “Afghanistan’s last president, Ashraf Ghani, rejects comparison to Ukraine’s Zelenskyy, says he’s 
‘lived an honorable life,’” Yahoo News, August 23, 2022. 
9 It remains unclear as of August 2022 how or in what sense these “caretaker” positions differ from permanent 
positions. One analyst has described the Taliban’s government during the 1990s as “nominally interim.” “Who Will 
Run the Taliban Government?” International Crisis Group, September 9, 2021. 
10 U.S. Department of State, 2021 Report on International Religious Freedom: Afghanistan, June 2, 2022. 
11 Fazelminallah Qazizai, “The Mysterious Public Appearances of the Taliban’s Supreme Leader,” Newlines, December 
20, 2021; “Haibatullah Akhundzada: Shadowy Taliban supreme leader whose son was suicide bomber,” Reuters, 
September 7, 2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

2 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Minister, Sirajuddin Haqqani. The U.S. Department of State has for years offered a reward of up 
to $10 million for information leading to the arrest of Haqqani, who is the head of the Haqqani 
Network, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) that is responsible for 
numerous attacks against U.S. and other international targets in Afghanistan.  

In the initial days of the transition, some observers had speculated that the Taliban might reach 
out to former Afghan government officials (such as former President Hamid Karzai, who held 
some meetings with senior Taliban figures after the August 2021 takeover) or to others from 
outside the movement as part of their promise to establish an “inclusive government.” The 
Taliban have not, however, reached beyond their own ranks to fill government positions and are 
reportedly staffing ministries with military and/or religious figures with little relevant experience, 
exacerbating the group’s administrative challenges and some internal tensions.12 

Some reports since the Taliban takeover have indicated dissension in the group’s ranks along 
various lines. While the Taliban have a history of effectively managing internal disputes, 
governing Afghanistan in 2022 presents new and unique challenges to the group’s consensus-
based decision-making.13 Points of tension reportedly exist between members of the group’s 
political wing (such as Baradar) and its military leaders (such as the Haqqanis) over who deserves 
the most credit for the group’s victory;14 between a leadership that seeks stability and rank and 
file fighters who are struggling to adjust to post-conflict life;15 and between those with different 
ideological perspectives and ethnic identities.16 

Current and Potential Opposition 

While the Taliban’s August 2021 takeover was swift, its triumph, according to many analysts, did 
not reflect massive popular support for the movement so much as a lack of support for the former 
government.17 Many elements of Afghan society, particularly in urban areas, appear to view the 
Taliban with skepticism, fear, or hostility, and small numbers of Afghans have demonstrated 
nonviolently to advocate for their rights and express opposition to the Taliban.18 The Taliban 
appear to have monitored most protests, and violently dispersed some.19  

The Taliban face organized armed opposition from two very different quarters. The first is the 
National Resistance Front (NRF), made up of figures aligned with the former Afghan state. NRF 
leaders have appealed for U.S. and international support and have retained Washington, DC-based 

12 Zia ur-Rehman and Emily Schmall, “The Taliban have staffing issues. They are looking for help in Pakistan,” New 
York Times, January 13, 2022; Thirteenth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted 
pursuant to resolution 2611 (2021) concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities constituting a 
threat to the peace stability and security of Afghanistan, S/2022/419, May 26, 2022. 
13 Andrew Watkins, “The Taliban one year on,” CTC Sentinel, August 2022. 
14 Khudai Noor Nasar, “Afghanistan: Taliban leaders in bust-up at presidential palace, sources say,” BBC, September 
15, 2021; “Cracks emerge within Taliban as Baradar-led group raises concern over Sirajuddin’s pro-Pashtun stance,” 
ANI, February 15, 2022. 
15 Stephanie Glinski, “Taliban struggle to maintain unity six months into their reign,” Foreign Policy, February 28, 
2022. 
16 Sudarsan Raghavan, “A popular Uzbek commander fought for the Taliban for more than two decades. He was 
arrested anyway,” Washington Post, February 1, 2022. 
17 “How the Taliban engineered ‘political collapse’ of Afghanistan,” Reuters, August 17, 2021; Shadi Hamid, 
“Americans never understood Afghanistan like the Taliban did,” Brookings Institution, August 23, 2021. 
18 Loveday Morris and Ruby Mellen, “Portraits of fear and loss,” Washington Post, January 12, 2022; “Afghans say 
they feel safer but less hopeful under Taliban rule,” Associated Press, February 15, 2022. 
19 “Taliban disperses Afghan women’s march for ‘work and freedom,’” Al Jazeera, August 13, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

3 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

representation.20 They have not won public backing from any foreign countries, perhaps due to 
the Taliban’s relatively stronger military position and closer Taliban ties with regional powers, 
including some that formerly supported Taliban opponents in the 1990s, such as Russia and Iran. 
It is difficult to assess the veracity of claimed NRF operations against Taliban fighters, which the 
Taliban dismiss as “propaganda,” but NRF operations appear to be increasing in frequency as the 
group carries out guerilla-style attacks against Taliban forces, mostly in and around the central 
province of Panjshir.21 Still, the NRF does not appear to have either the military capabilities or the 
broad-based public support that would likely be necessary to seriously threaten the Taliban’s 
position.22  

An arguably more potent armed threat to the Taliban is the local Islamic State affiliate (Islamic 
State-Khorasan Province, ISKP, also known as ISIS-K), a longtime Taliban adversary. ISKP has 
opposed the Taliban since its 2015 establishment, viewing the Taliban’s Afghanistan-focused 
nationalist political project as counter to the Islamic State’s universalist vision of a global 
caliphate. Since the Taliban takeover, ISKP’s ranks have swelled to as many as 4,000 fighters 
despite a concerted Taliban offensive, and a series of major attacks claimed by or attributed to 
ISKP in spring 2022 (many targeting Afghanistan’s Shia minority, the Hazaras) raises the 
prospect of greater violence.23 Experts disagree about the potency of the ISKP threat and the 
Taliban’s self-asserted ability to counter the group without external assistance.24  

U.S. Policy Impacts of the Taliban’s Return to Power 

Renewed Taliban rule in Afghanistan has implications for a number of U.S. policy interests. It has 
created opportunities and challenges for the various terrorist groups that have a presence in 
Afghanistan, and has rendered obsolete former U.S. plans to partner with Afghan authorities to 
counter terrorist threats “over-the-horizon.” Advancing protection of women’s and other human 
rights has been another major U.S. policy goal in Afghanistan since 2001; the Taliban have taken 
numerous actions to roll back those rights since retaking power. U.S. policymakers, including 
many Members of Congress, have also focused on securing the relocation of remaining U.S. 
citizens and Afghans who previously worked for the U.S. government, a halting effort that 
remains ongoing as of August 2022.  

Counterterrorism  

A number of Islamist extremist terrorist groups have for decades operated in Afghanistan, and the 
Taliban have related to them in varying ways. ISKP and Al Qaeda (AQ) are two of the most 
significant of these terrorist groups, and the Taliban’s takeover has affected them differently.  

ISKP, which has clashed with the Taliban as mentioned above, has long been a significant U.S. 
counterterrorism concern. Under the former U.S.-backed Afghan government, the United States 
launched airstrikes in support of Taliban offensives against ISKP, a rare area of prior U.S.-Taliban 
cooperation.25 In February 2022, the U.S. State Department announced rewards of up to $10 

20 Ali Maisam Nazary, “What the Taliban really fear,” Foreign Affairs, August 19, 2022. 
21 Zia Ur Rehman, “Afghanistan’s resistance alliance aims to pry Taliban’s grip loose,” Nikkei Asia, June 13, 2022. 
22 “Afghanistan’s security challenges under the Taliban,” International Crisis Group, August 12, 2022. 
23 Claire Parker, “How strong is the Islamic State in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan?” Washington Post, August 19, 2022. 
24 Abdul Sayed, “Why Islamic State Khurasan poses an indigenous threat to the Afghan Taliban,” Nexus, May 9, 2022; 
Parker, op. cit. 
25 Wesley Morgan, “Our secret Taliban Air Force,” Washington Post, October 22, 2020. 

Congressional Research Service  

4 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

million each for information related to ISKP leader Sanaullah Ghafari as well as those responsible 
for the August 26, 2021, ISKP attack at Kabul airport that killed and injured hundreds of people, 
including over 30 U.S. service members.26  

While ISKP is seen as more operationally ambitious and capable in Afghanistan than Al Qaeda, 
the July 2022 killing of Al Qaeda leader Ayman al Zawahiri in Kabul attracted considerable 
attention to the issue of AQ-Taliban ties.27 Despite (or perhaps because of) U.S. counterterrorism 
pressure, those ties have persisted for decades.28 In October 2020, Afghan government troops 
killed a high-ranking AQ operative who reportedly was living and working with Taliban forces, 
underscoring the close and interrelated connections between the groups.29 The circumstances of 
Zawahiri’s residence in Kabul and what they might reveal about internal Taliban dynamics 
beyond continued AQ ties are not yet clear. National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan has 
suggested that some elements of the Taliban might not have supported or even been aware of 
Zawahiri’s presence in Kabul, possibly leading to tensions within the ground.30 Observers 
speculate about the impact (if any) of Zawahiri’s killing on AQ capabilities and AQ-Taliban ties.31 

In any case, per U.N. sanctions monitors, Al Qaeda “is not viewed as posing an immediate 
international threat from its safe haven in Afghanistan because it lacks an external operational 
capability and does not currently wish to cause the Taliban international difficulty or 
embarrassment.” 32 The U.S. intelligence community assessed in March 2022 that AQ “will gauge 
its ability to operate in Afghanistan under Taliban restrictions” as Al Qaeda and the Taliban 
recalibrate their relationship and activities.33  

From the outset of the 2021 U.S. withdrawal, U.S. officials said that the United States would 
maintain the ability to combat terrorist threats in Afghanistan such as ISKP and Al Qaeda without 
a military presence on the ground there by utilizing assets based outside of Afghanistan, in what 
U.S. officials describe as an “over-the-horizon” approach.34 With the Taliban in control of 
Afghanistan, the United States has had to alter any plans that had been predicated on the 
continued existence of the former Afghan government and its security forces. U.S. Central 
Command (CENTCOM) Commander General Michael Kurilla described over-the-horizon 
capabilities as “extremely difficult but not impossible” in February 2022 testimony.35 President 
Biden has asserted that the Zawahiri strike vindicated his decision to complete the removal of 
U.S. ground forces from Afghanistan and pursue an over-the-horizon approach. With no U.S. 
military or diplomatic presence in Afghanistan, and the nearest U.S. military bases hundreds of 

26 U.S. Department of State, “New Initiatives in the Fight Against ISIS-K,” February 7, 2022. 
27 CRS Insight IN11976, Al Qaeda Leader Zawahiri Killed in U.S. Drone Strike in Afghanistan, by Clayton Thomas.  
28 Thirtieth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2610 
(2021) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, U.N. Document S/2022/547, 
released July 15, 2022. 
29 Jeff Seldin, “US Calls Death of al-Qaida Official a Major Setback for Terror Group,” Voice of America, October 26, 
2020. 
30 “The National Security Advisor’s very busy week,” NPR, August 4, 2022. 
31 CRS Insight IN11976, Al Qaeda Leader Zawahiri Killed in U.S. Drone Strike in Afghanistan, by Clayton Thomas. 
32 Thirtieth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, op cit.  
33 Office of the Director for National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community, 
March 2022. 
34 See, for example, Remarks by President Biden on the Way Forward in Afghanistan, White House, April 14, 2021. 
35 See transcript at http://www.cq.com/doc/congressionaltranscripts-6450846?3&search=8TnqSQnx. 

Congressional Research Service  

5 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

miles away, the United States is reportedly working to increase its intelligence-gathering 
capabilities elsewhere in the region.36 

Human Rights: Focus on Women and Ethnic and Religious Minorities 

The Afghanistan in which the Taliban came to power in August 2021 was in many ways a 
different country than the one they last ruled in 2001. After 2001, women became active 
participants in many parts of Afghan society; protections for them, and ethnic and religious 
minorities, were enshrined in the country’s 2004 constitution. While some early Taliban actions 
suggested a possible measure of moderation from their highly oppressive 1996-2001 rule, UN 
Rapporteur Bachelet said in June 2022 that “what we are witnessing in Afghanistan today is the 
institutionalized, systematic oppression of women” and that “Afghan women are rapidly facing 
the worst-case scenario many-feared.”37 

The Taliban takeover appears to have reduced high levels of violence that characterized the 
conflict, a development particularly welcomed by those in rural areas,38 but it has increased fears 
of many Afghans about repression and women’s rights.39 The Taliban have closed the Ministry of 
Women’s Affairs, which had been a part of the former Afghan government, and have reinstated 
the Ministry of Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice, which enforced the Taliban’s 
interpretation of Islam in the 1990s. The ministry has issued guidance that seeks to impose new 
restrictions on Afghan women, including by directing that women should not be allowed to travel 
long distances without a male guardian and that male relatives of women who do not wear a hijab 
that fully covers their bodies should be punished.40 Amnesty International reported in July 2022 
that increasing numbers of women and girls have been arrested for violating these policies.41 
Those restrictions, together with the overall economic collapse, have led to a decline in women’s 
participation in the workforce.42 

Of particular concern to many U.S. policymakers are Taliban policies toward education for 
Afghan girls. Taliban spokespersons said in early 2022 that girls’ secondary schools, effectively 
shuttered in most of the country since the August 2021 takeover, would reopen with the start of 
the new school year in late March 2022.43 However, on March 23, with some girls already present 
in schools, the Taliban abruptly reversed course and announced that secondary schools for girls 
would remain closed, shocking many observers.44 One analysis attributes the change to the 
advocacy of hardline clerics within the group and Akhundzada.45 Other Taliban figures, including 

36 Karoun Demirjian, “U.S. works to scale up intelligence networks in Central Asia,” Washington Post, June 21, 2022. 
37 United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, “High Commissioner updates the Human 
Rights Council on Afghanistan,” June 15, 2022. 
38 Anand Gopal, “The Other Afghan Women,” The New Yorker, September 6, 2021; Susannah George, “A year of 
peace in one of Afghanistan’s deadliest provinces,” Washington Post, August 12, 2022. 
39 Margherita Stancati, “After Taliban Return, Afghan Women Face Old Pressures From Fathers, Brothers,” New York 
Times, December 15, 2021. 
40 “No long-distance travel for women without male relative: Taliban,” Al Jazeera, December 26, 2021; David 
Zucchino and Safiullah Padshah, “Taliban impose head-to-toe coverings for women,” New York Times, May 7, 2022. 
41 Death in Slow Motion: Women and Girls under Taliban Rule, Amnesty International, July 2022. 
42 International Labor Organization, “Employment prospects in Afghanistan; A rapid impact assessment,” January 
2022; Ruchi Kumar and Hikmat Noori, “‘We are worse off’: Afghanistan further impoverished as women vanish from 
workforce,” Guardian, May 16, 2022. 
43 Kathy Gannon, “The AP interview: Taliban pledge all girls in schools soon,” Associated Press, January 15, 2022. 
44 Kathy Gannon, “Many baffled by Taliban reneging pledge on girls’ education,” Associated Press, March 24, 2022. 
45 Ashley Jackson, “The ban on older girls’ education: Taleban conservatives ascendant and a leadership in disarray,” 

Congressional Research Service  

6 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

both Baradar and the Haqqanis, reportedly support secondary education for girls (and some 
educate their own daughters abroad).46 The evidently greater influence of the group’s traditionally 
conservative leaders (over that of pragmatists who urge greater engagement with the outside 
world) suggests that external actors may have limited leverage over Taliban decisions.  

Taliban rhetoric and action with regard to ethnic and religious minorities have also received 
scrutiny from U.S. policymakers. Many Hazaras (Shia Muslims who comprise 10-15% of 
Afghanistan’s population and represent one of the country’s largest ethnoreligious minorities) 
previously expressed fear about the Taliban’s possible return.47 Since their August 2021 takeover, 
the Taliban have demonstrated a more accepting official stance toward the Hazaras, particularly in 
urban areas, despite some reports of killings and forced displacement in the Hazaras’ historic 
homelands in central Afghanistan in fall 2021.48 While the Taliban government has not persecuted 
Hazaras, many Hazaras fault the Taliban for not establishing an inclusive government and not 
stopping the ISKP attacks that have repeatedly targeted Hazaras in 2021 and 2022.49 

Ongoing Relocations of U.S. Citizens and Certain Afghans 

The Taliban’s entry into Kabul on August 15, 2021 triggered the mass evacuation of tens of 
thousands of U.S. citizens (including all diplomatic personnel), partner country citizens, and 
Afghans who worked for international efforts and/or the former Afghan government. U.S. 
officials say that U.S. military forces facilitated the evacuation of 124,000 individuals, including 
5,300 U.S. citizens, as part of Operation Allies Refuge, “the largest air evacuation in US 
history.”50 Since that operation ended on August 30, 2021, the State Department has said that it 
has assisted in the departure of 13,000 Afghans from the country, in addition to 800 U.S. citizens 
and 600 lawful permanent residents as of August 2022.51  

U.S. officials have said that their efforts to secure the relocation of remaining U.S. citizens and 
eligible Afghan partners who seek to leave the country have “no deadline.”52 According to the 
State Department, the number of U.S. citizens it has identified in Afghanistan has fluctuated in 
the midst of continued relocations and because of cases in which additional U.S. citizens come 
forward to ask for assistance to leave.53 On April 28, 2022, Secretary Antony Blinken said, “There 
are at present 126, as of a few days ago, American citizens remaining of whom 37 seek to leave 
and that we are assisting.”54  

Afghanistan Analysts Network, March 29, 2022. 
46 Stephanie Glinski and Ruchi Kumar, “Taliban u-turn over Afghan girls’ education reveals deep leadership 
divisions,” Guardian, March 25, 2022; Sabawoon Samim, “Who gets to go to school? (3): Are Taleban attitudes 
starting to change from within?” Afghanistan Analysts Network, February 7, 2022. 
47 David Zucchino and Fatima Faizi, “They Are Thriving After Years of Persecution but Fear a Taliban Deal,” New 
York Times, March 27, 2019. 
48 Shirin Jaafari, “‘Why don’t you have mercy?’: Afghanistan’s Hazara people increasingly face eviction, violence 
under Taliban rule,” PRI, October 5, 2021. 
49 Nilly Kohzad, “‘It doesn’t matter if we get killed,’ Afghanistan’s Hazaras speak out,” Diplomat, May 27, 2022. 
50 Statement available at https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
Printed%2028%20Sep%20SASC%20CJCS%20Written%20Statement.pdf. 
51 Some of those evacuated U.S. citizens reportedly traveled to Afghanistan after August 2021. Department Press 
Briefing – August 15, 2022, U.S. Department of State; Andrew Desiderio et al., “800 Americans evacuated from 
Afghanistan since Taliban takeover,” Politico, August 14, 2022. 
52 U.S. Department of State, “Afghanistan Relocation and Resettlement Update,” December 13, 2021.  
53 Department Press Briefing – April 12, 2022, U.S. Department of State. 
54 Testimony of Secretary of State Antony Blinken, in U.S. Congress, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, The State 

Congressional Research Service  

7 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

One December 2021 press report, citing a State Department official, stated that around 62,000 
Afghan Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) applicants remain in Afghanistan.55 This figure excludes 
the tens of thousands of Afghans who may be at risk and eligible for other forms of relief but 
have not applied or are not eligible for an SIV. In a February 2022 report, an advocacy group for 
SIV-eligible persons stated that 78,000 of the estimated 81,000 SIV applicants in Afghanistan 
with visa applications pending as of August 15, 2021 remain in Afghanistan.56 The State 
Department has disputed the accuracy of this report.57 In May 2022, the State Department 
reportedly estimated that between 70,000 and 160,000 Afghans were eligible for SIVs.58 

Some Afghans who seek to relocate reportedly remain in hiding, fearing Taliban retribution. The 
Taliban issued a general amnesty after coming to power, but, according to a press account, a 
report from U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to the Security Council in January 2022 
stated that the United Nations has received “credible allegations” of Taliban reprisals against 
those individuals, including dozens of killings.59 In April 2022, Secretary Blinken noted attacks 
by the Taliban against “those who are part of the former government,” adding that most appeared 
to be happening “at a local level” and were not “centrally directed.”60 

The Taliban have reportedly interfered with flights at times, including by demanding seats for 
Taliban-selected individuals to work abroad and remit money.61 Secretary Blinken said in late 
April 2022 that the Taliban had allowed freedom of movement to some degree but cautioned that 
there were still limited means of transportation to enable individuals to leave Afghanistan.62 The 
United States has reportedly paid, through Qatar, for tickets on some Afghan airlines that fly to 
Qatar for individuals to leave Afghanistan.63 Other impediments to relocations from Afghanistan 
includes logistical issues at Kabul’s international airport (see textbox) and issues with Afghans 
obtaining travel documentation.64 

Status of Kabul Airport 
Relocation efforts have been complicated by the status of Kabul’s international airport. After the final departure of 
U.S. forces, Qatar and Turkey worked to make the airport—which sustained damage to its runways, radar system, 

Department's Foreign Policy Priorities and the FY23 Budget Request, op. cit. 
55 Jessica Donati, “More Than 60,000 Interpreters, Visa Applicants Remain in Afghanistan,” Wall Street Journal, 
December 16, 2021.  
56 Association of Wartime Allies, “On The Ground Report - Feb 2022.”  
57 Dan De Luce, “U.S. ‘left behind’ 78,000 Afghan allies in chaotic withdrawal: NGO report,” NBC News, March 1, 
2022. 
58 Alex Thompson and Allie Bice, “Biden’s broken promise to SIV holders,” Politico, May 16, 2022. 
59 “UN chief accuses Taliban of scores of revenge killings since seizing control in Afghanistan,” RFE/RL, January 30, 
2022. 
60 Testimony of Secretary of State Antony Blinken, in U.S. Congress, House Committee on Foreign Affairs, The State 
Department's Foreign Policy Priorities and the FY23 Budget Request, op. cit. 
61 Courtney Kube, Dan De Luce and Josh Lederman, “The Taliban have halted all evacuee flights out of Afghanistan 
for the past two weeks,” NBC News, December 23, 2021. 
62 Testimony of Secretary of State Antony Blinken, in U.S. Congress, House Committee on Appropriations 
Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs, Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Request for the 
Department of State, hearings, 117th Cong., 2nd sess., April 28, 2022. 
63 Dan De Luce and Cortney Kube, “Biden admin relies on Taliban-controlled airline to help Afghans flee 
Afghanistan,” NBC News, June 8, 2022. 
64 Amy Cheng and Haq Nawaz Khan, “Hundreds of Afghans gather outside passport office as Taliban resumes issuing 
travel documents,” Washington Post, October 6, 2021; “Painful Passport Problems in Afghanistan,” RFE/RL, January 
16, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

8 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

and other components during the U.S. evacuation effort and withdrawal—operational. As of August 2022, some 
domestic and regional airlines are reportedly carrying out flights from Kabul airport, but major foreign carriers 
have yet to resume operations.65 Despite a preliminary December 2021 deal with Qatar and Turkey to operate 
five airports in Afghanistan, the Taliban in May 2022 announced that they had reached a seemingly similar deal with 
the United Arab Emirates; the terms of that agreement remain unclear.66 

Economic Collapse, Humanitarian Crisis, and U.S. 
Policy 
The Taliban’s return to power has exacerbated one of the worst humanitarian crises in the world 
in Afghanistan, long one of the world’s poorest and most aid-dependent countries. A number of 
U.S. policy actions, including the cut-off of international development assistance, U.S. and 
international sanctions on the Taliban, and the U.S. hold on Afghanistan’s central bank assets, 
appear relevant to the economic breakdown that underlies the humanitarian crisis.  

The United States and other international donors provided billions of dollars a year to support the 
former Afghan government, financing over half of its $6 billion annual budget and as much as 
80% of total public expenditures.67 Much of that development assistance halted with the Taliban’s 
August 2021 takeover, plunging the country into what U.N. officials describe as economic “free 
fall” as the country’s economy contracted by as much as a third in the last four months of 2021.68 
Humanitarian aid, including cash transfers, has “supported some economic stabilization,” 
according to the World Bank, but Afghanistan’s economic outlook remains “stark.”69  

The economic collapse has exacerbated what was already a severe humanitarian crisis in 
Afghanistan prior to August 2021, due primarily to conflict, drought, and the COVID-19 
pandemic. Indicators suggest that conditions have worsened significantly since August 2021: the 
World Food Program asserted in August 2022 that 92% of Afghans reported not having enough to 
eat, an increase from the 80% of Afghans that had insufficient food before the Taliban takeover.70 
WFP also reported in June that global food price increases and supply chain delays caused by the 
war in Ukraine are “having a direct impact on WFP’s Afghanistan operations.” The U.N. Special 
Representative for Afghanistan said in March 2022 that due to emergency assistance from 
international donors, “we have perhaps averted our worst fears of famine and widespread 
starvation,” though the situation remains dire.71 In August 2022, the U.N. Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF) estimated that 1.1 million Afghan children are expected to need treatment for severe 
acute malnutrition.72 

In terms of U.S. policy, the United States has provided over $900 million in humanitarian 
assistance in Afghanistan since the Taliban takeover.73 While such assistance plays a crucial role 

65 Tamim Shahir, “Major airlines still not making flights to Kabul,” TOLONews, August 8, 2022. 
66 Rahim Faiez, “Taliban say deal signed with UAE firm to manage airports,” Diplomat, May 25, 2022. 
67 Roxanna Shapour, “Realpolitik and the 2021 National Budget: The toxic struggle for money and power that 
undermined Afghanistan’s republic,” Afghanistan Analysts Network, December 21, 2021. 
68 “Afghanistan: Overview,” World Bank, April 13, 2022. 
69 Ibid. 
70 “Afghanistan Situation Report,” World Food Program, August 15, 2022. 
71 “Briefing by Special Representative Deborah Lyons to the Security Council,” United Nations Assistance Mission in 
Afghanistan, March 2, 2022. 
72 “Afghanistan: Humanitarian Situation Report #8, 1-31 July 2022,” UNICEF, August 2022. 
73 USAID press releases, August 12, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

9 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

in averting further humanitarian suffering, it is different in many ways from former U.S. security, 
development, and stabilization assistance, which averaged over $5 billion annually between 
FY2019 and FY2021. In addition to providing some humanitarian assistance, those funds paid the 
salaries of Afghan soldiers and civil servants, supported key government services, and ultimately 
made up a large portion of Afghanistan’s economy. The Biden Administration’s FY2023 budget 
request proposes $345 million for health, education, and other forms of assistance in Afghanistan; 
the lack of a U.S. diplomatic presence in Afghanistan may complicate or constrain the 
implementation and/or oversight of U.S. funding. 

Beyond assistance, the two U.S. policy areas that appear to have the greatest relevance to the 
economic and humanitarian situation are sanctions and the ongoing U.S. hold on Afghanistan’s 
central bank reserves. U.S. sanctions on the Taliban (in place in various forms since 1999) 
remain, but it is unclear to what extent they are affecting humanitarian conditions in Afghanistan; 
the head of the Norwegian Refugee Council said in January 2022 that sanctions have “held back” 
their operations.74 Since the Taliban’s takeover, the U.S. Department of the Treasury has issued 
several general licenses stating that U.S. sanctions do not prohibit the provision of assistance to 
Afghanistan and authorizing various humanitarian and commercial transactions.75 Still, the 
continued existence of sanctions might lead financial institutions or other actors to “de-risk” 
Afghanistan by refusing to engage in the country rather than risk violation of U.S. sanctions. For 
more on U.S. sanctions on the Taliban, see CRS In Focus IF12039, Afghanistan: Humanitarian 
Crisis, Economic Collapse, and U.S. Sanctions. 

The Biden Administration’s hold on U.S.-based Afghan central bank assets has also drawn 
scrutiny. Imposed days after the Taliban entered Kabul to prevent the Taliban from accessing the 
funds, the Taliban and some foreign leaders have urged the United States to release the hold on 
those assets, which total around $7 billion. On February 11, 2022, the Biden Administration 
announced that it would “seek to facilitate access of $3.5 billion [of the assets] ... for the benefit 
of the Afghan people,” pending ongoing litigation related to the September 11, 2001, attacks.76 
The Administration has reportedly engaged with the Taliban on the issue, including a potential 
Switzerland-based trust fund.77 For more, see CRS In Focus IF12052, Afghanistan Central Bank 
Reserves. 

Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors 
Regional dynamics directly affect developments in Afghanistan, which is landlocked and has 
throughout its history been the object of intervention by its neighbors and other foreign powers. 
Events in Afghanistan also have consequences for those neighbors. 

Pakistan. The neighboring state widely considered most important in this regard is Pakistan, 
which has played an active, and by many accounts destabilizing, role in Afghan affairs for 
decades, including by actively supporting the Taliban during its 1990s rule and much of its 
subsequent insurgency. Many analysts regarded the Taliban takeover at least initially as a triumph 

74 See interview at https://twitter.com/nrc_norway/status/1486778209387565058.  
75 See Treasury Department Fact Sheet, December 22, 2021, at https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/
afg_factsheet_20211222_nu.pdf.  
76 See Executive Order at https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/afghanistan_bank_eo.pdf and briefing at 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/02/11/background-press-call-on-u-s-support-for-
the-people-of-afghanistan/. 
77 Jonathan Landay, “Exclusive: U.S. commits to Afghan asset talks despite frustration with Taliban,” Reuters, August 
22, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

10 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

for Pakistan’s regional policy, pointing to statements of evident support for the takeover from 
Pakistani leaders.78 Senior Pakistani officials have held numerous meetings with the new Taliban 
government, both in Kabul and Islamabad, since August 2021. 

However, there are some indications that the Taliban’s return to power may pose challenges for 
Pakistan. The Taliban’s victory may provide a morale and perhaps material boost to Pakistan-
based Islamist terrorist groups, including the so-called Pakistani Taliban (Tehreek-i Taliban-i 
Pakistan, or TTP, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization). TTP attacks against Pakistani 
security forces increased after August 2021, reportedly prompting the Pakistani government to 
seek the Afghan Taliban’s mediation of several ceasefires, most recently in June 2022.79 
Afghanistan-Pakistan relations are further complicated by the presence of over one million 
Afghan refugees in Pakistan, as well as a long-running and ethnically tinged dispute over their 
shared 1,600-mile border, at which Taliban and Pakistani government forces have intermittently 
clashed in 2022.80 

Iran. Iran, with which Afghanistan shares its western border, opposed the Taliban’s 1990s rule 
but has maintained relations with the group while emphasizing the need for representation for 
Afghanistan’s ethnic and religious groups with which Iran has close ties (namely Tajiks, who 
speak a variant of Persian, and Hazaras, who are mostly Shia Muslims). Official Taliban visits to 
Tehran preceded the group’s August 2021 takeover, and have continued since then, including with 
the visit of the Taliban’s acting foreign minister in January 2022. Disputes in 2022 over water 
rights and refugees could portend future tensions.81 

Central Asia. Afghanistan’s Central Asian neighbors (Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan) 
have responded in varying ways to the Taliban’s takeover. The Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan 
governments appear to be prioritizing economic ties, including the planned Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) natural gas pipeline, and have had numerous official 
engagements with the Taliban. Tajikistan, on the other hand, has opposed the Taliban, a result 
both of Tajikistan’s own struggles with Islamist militancy as well as ties with Afghan Tajiks (the 
country’s second largest ethnic group), some of whom oppose the Taliban’s rule.82 

China. The prospect of greater Chinese influence and activity in Afghanistan has attracted some 
congressional attention since the Taliban takeover.83 China, which played a relatively limited role 
in Afghanistan under the former government, made some economic investments in Afghanistan 
(particularly in the development of Afghan minerals and other resources) prior to the Taliban 
takeover, but major projects have not come to fruition due to instability, lack of infrastructure, and 
other limitations.84 Despite concerns about Afghanistan-based Islamist terrorist groups, China has 

78 Ishaan Tharoor, “Pakistan’s hand in the Taliban’s victory,” Washington Post, August 18, 2021; Husain Haqqani, 
“Pakista’’s Pyrrhic Victory in Afghanistan,” Foreign Affairs, July 22, 2021. 
79 Rhea Sinha, “TTP-Pakistan peace talks: the pitfalls and their implications,” ORF, August 18, 2022. 
80 Pakistan, the United Nations, and others recognize the 1893 Durand Line as an international boundary, but 
successive Afghan governments, including the Taliban, have not. See Vinay Kaura, “Pushed over the edge: political 
and military dynamics at the Afghanistan-Pakistan border,” Middle East Institute, May 9, 2022. 
81 Christian Hoj Hansen and Halimullah Kousary, “Can Iran get along with the Taliban?” War on the Rocks, June 7, 
2022. 
82 Abubakar Siddique, “Hostilities grow between Taliban and Tajikistan amid border closure, truck seizures,” 
Gandhara, May 19, 2022. 
83 See, for example, H.R. 5404, S. 2826, and Sec 5404 of H.R. 7900. 
84 Matthew Funaiole and Brian Hart, “Afghanistan Is No Treasure Trove for China,” Foreign Policy, September 28, 
2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

11 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

signaled acceptance of the Taliban’s rule, with its foreign minister emphasizing in a May 2022 
visit to Kabul that China “respects the independent choices made by the Afghan people.”85 

Congressional Action and Outlook 
The Taliban’s takeover attracted intense congressional and public attention. U.S. public attention 
appears to have decreased in the subsequent months, but Afghanistan remains the subject of 
significant congressional interest as some Members seek to account for the evident failure of U.S. 
efforts and grapple with the reality of the Taliban’s renewed rule.86 

Congressional oversight of Afghanistan appears robust. Congressional committees held at least 
ten hearings specifically on Afghanistan in the weeks after the Taliban’s takeover.87 Senate 
Foreign Relations minority staff released an assessment of the August 2021 evacuation in 
February 2022, and the House Foreign Affairs Committee ranking member said he would produce 
his own investigative report in August 2022. In addition, Congress established the Afghanistan 
War Commission (AWC, Section 1094 of the FY2022 National Defense Authorization Act, 
NDAA, P.L. 117-81) charged with examining the war and developing “a series of lessons learned 
and recommendations for the way forward” in a final report to be issued within three years.  

Congress has also increased reporting requirements related to Afghanistan. In the FY2022 
NDAA, Congress directed the Administration to submit reports covering a number of topics, 
including U.S. over-the horizon counterterrorism capabilities; the status of U.S.-supplied military 
materiel in Afghanistan; and the lessons of Afghanistan for other U.S. security cooperation 
programs. Reports required in the House-passed FY2023 NDAA (H.R. 7900) include a strategy 
for reimbursing U.S. personnel who expended personal funds in support of evacuation efforts and 
an assessment of China’s activities in Afghanistan. The bill would also mandate an interagency 
inspector general review of efforts to support and process evacuees from Afghanistan, including 
screening procedures, and a full accounting of the number of individuals evacuated in 2021 
disaggregated by age, SIV eligibility, and other categories. An amendment to add an additional 
reporting requirement on the humanitarian impact of U.S. sanctions and the hold on central bank 
assets was made in order but did not come up for a vote. Members may consider directing the 
Administration to provide additional reports on other topics of interest, such as the impact of the 
U.S. diplomatic withdrawal and conditions for its reinstatement.  

Going forward, U.S. policy, including congressional action, will be influenced and likely 
constrained by a number of factors, including 

 

a dearth of information about dynamics in Afghanistan, given the lack of U.S. 
diplomats and other on the ground observers and Taliban-imposed limitations on 
journalists; and 

85 Shannon Tiezzi, “China signals it’s back to business as usual with Taliban government,” Diplomat, March 25, 2022. 
86 Google Trends, “Afghanistan,” “Past 12 months,” accessed August 26, 2022. 
87 Hearings on Afghanistan include those held by: House Foreign Affairs Committee (September 13, 2021, with 
Secretary Blinken); Senate Foreign Relations Committee (September 14, 2021, with Secretary Blinken); Senate Armed 
Services Committee (September 28, 2021, with Secretary Austin, General Milley, and General McKenzie); House 
Armed Services Committee (September 29, 2021, with Secretary Austin, General Milley, and General McKenzie); 
Senate Armed Services Committee (September 30, 2021, with outside witnesses); House Foreign Affairs Committee 
(October 5, 2021, with former U.S. officials); Senate Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee (October 5, 
2021, with outside witnesses); House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on International Development, International 
Organizations, and Global Corporate Impact (October 6, 2021, with SIGAR); Senate Armed Service Committee 
(October 26, 2021, with DOD witnesses); and Senate Foreign Relations Committee (November 17, 2021, with former 
U.S. officials). 

Congressional Research Service  

12 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

 

the historical legacy of U.S. conflict with the Taliban, which may make 
cooperation with the group, even to advance U.S. policy priorities, politically 
difficult. 

Perhaps more fundamental is the challenge of how to pursue U.S. policy priorities that may be 
difficult to reconcile: stabilizing Afghanistan and providing support to Afghans while avoiding 
actions that might benefit the Taliban. While providing humanitarian aid may be sufficient to 
stave off mass casualties, it is unlikely to sustainably improve economic conditions. Financial 
assistance could improve the Afghan economy, ameliorating the humanitarian situation, but 
comes with the risk of diversion of some funds or broader benefits to the Taliban. In considering 
the Administration’s FY2023 budget request, Members of Congress may weigh these and other 
options, including conditions on U.S. assistance. 

The Taliban have called for international recognition, assistance, and sanctions relief, but since 
returning to power they have not shown willingness to make compromises on important issues to 
obtain them. Nearly every country, U.S. partners and adversaries alike, has urged the Taliban to 
form a more inclusive government, and many countries have joined the United States in calling 
for the group to lift restrictions on women and girls and break ties with terrorist groups. In 
response, the Taliban have stalled, equivocated, and ultimately either ignored or rejected outright 
these calls. Foreign policy tools that the United States has traditionally used as leverage may not 
be as effective in Afghanistan as in other contexts.88  

In shaping U.S. policy toward Afghanistan, Congress may consider a number of policy options, 
including:  

  Congress may examine how U.S. assistance, and conditions thereon, may impact 
Taliban actions, including with regard to women’s rights more broadly and the 
ability of Afghan girls to attend secondary schools in particular, to inform 
congressional consideration of the Administration’s budget request and action on 
FY2023 appropriations; 

  Congress may request or mandate additional information from the Administration 
about the number and status of U.S. citizens and Afghan partners who remain in 
Afghanistan and about the status of U.S. efforts to secure their relocation, 
including resources devoted to those efforts, obstacles to further relocations, and 
Administration plans to overcome those obstacles; 

  Congress may examine the impact of U.S. sanctions on the targeted individuals, 
the Afghan economy, and Afghan society more broadly, including by requiring 
reporting thereon from the Administration and/or the Government Accountability 
Office, to assess whether they are achieving their intended objectives; and 
  Congress may examine the impact and efficacy of oversight of previous U.S. 

efforts in Afghanistan to shape future U.S. policy efforts (e.g., H.R. 8560, 117th 
Congress), congressional authorizing and appropriations measures, and oversight 
mechanisms, (including those intended to oversee U.S. assistance to other foreign 
partners, such as Ukraine). Relevant reports from the AWC and the Department 
of Defense (and the federally funded research and development center with 
whom the Department contracts, as directed by Section 1323 of P.L. 117-81) are 
due to be submitted within approximately one and two years, respectively. 

88 See, for example, Marvin Weinbaum, “America can’t change the Taliban,” National Interest, August 15, 2022; Kate 
Bateman, “A year after the Taliban takeover: what’s next for the U.S. in Afghanistan?” U.S. Institute of Peace, August 
11, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

13 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy: In Brief 

Author Information 

Clayton Thomas 
Specialist in Middle Eastern Affairs 

Disclaimer 

This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan 
shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and 
under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other 
than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in 
connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not 
subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in 
its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or 
material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to 
copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

Congressional Research Service  

R45122 · VERSION 52 · UPDATED 

14 

 
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
