Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Updated February 28, 2023 

Congressional Research Service 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

R45122 

 
 
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

In 2021, U.S. and international forces withdrew from Afghanistan after nearly two decades of 
operations, and the Taliban, a Sunni Islamist extremist group that formerly ruled the country 
from 1996 to 2001, retook power. The United States does not recognize the Taliban or any other 
entity as the government of Afghanistan and reports there are no U.S. diplomatic or military 
personnel in the country. The Taliban’s position appears secure, though its rule appears to have 
had negative effects for most Afghans, as well as a number of U.S. policy interests.  

SUMMARY 

R45122 

February 28, 2023 

Clayton Thomas 
Specialist in Middle 
Eastern Affairs 

The Taliban government is dominated by former officials from the Taliban’s prior rule or 
longtime loyalists. Signs of dissension in the group’s ranks along various lines have emerged, though the Taliban have a 
history of effectively managing internal disputes. Some Afghans have sought to advocate for their rights and express 
opposition to the Taliban in nonviolent demonstrations, which the Taliban have sometimes violently dispersed, but the 
Taliban do not appear to face effective political opposition. Other Afghans have taken up arms against the Taliban, claiming 
guerilla-style attacks against Taliban forces and calling for international assistance. The regional Islamic State affiliate has 
conducted attacks against Taliban forces, Afghan civilians, and international targets alike.  

Some Members of Congress have focused on a number of impacts of the Taliban’s renewed rule on U.S. interests: 
  Counterterrorism. The Taliban takeover has had different impacts on the Islamic State and Al Qaeda, 

historic Taliban adversaries and partners, respectively. With no U.S. military forces based in Afghanistan 
or neighboring states, the United States is pursuing an “over-the-horizon” counterterrorism approach. 
  Women and Girls. Taliban actions have been detrimental for the status of women and girls in Afghanistan, 
a longtime U.S. policy concern, with girls prohibited from attending school above the primary level and 
women’s roles drastically curtailed, including a December 2022 decision to ban women from working for 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs).  

  Relocating U.S. Partners. Some Members of Congress have closely followed ongoing U.S. efforts to 

relocate remaining U.S. citizens, as well as the tens of thousands of Afghans who worked for U.S. efforts 
and seek to leave the country. 

Some Members have also expressed concern about dire humanitarian conditions in Afghanistan. Since the Taliban takeover, 
Afghanistan has faced intersecting and overwhelming humanitarian and economic crises, a result of challenges both 
preexisting (such as natural disasters and Afghanistan’s weak economic base) and new (such as the cut-off of international 
development assistance, U.S. sanctions on the Taliban, and the U.S. hold on Afghan central bank assets). In response, the 
Biden Administration has provided over $1 billion in humanitarian assistance, issued general licenses authorizing various 
humanitarian and commercial transactions, and established a Switzerland-based “Afghan Fund” to disburse some of 
Afghanistan’s central bank assets to support the Afghan economy.  

Congressional oversight of U.S. Afghanistan policy has featured numerous hearings, past and ongoing investigations, and the 
creation of the Afghanistan War Commission. Congress has also imposed a variety of reporting requirements to monitor 
dynamics in Afghanistan and their implications for U.S. policy. Going forward, Congress may consider further reporting 
requirements, resources, or investigative efforts related to various U.S. interests as it evaluates the Biden Administration’s 
budget request and defense authorization measures and examines lessons learned in Afghanistan. Future reports from the 
congressionally created Afghanistan War Commission and other bodies may offer lessons for legislators. 

Congressional action could be influenced or constrained by a lack of reliable information about events in Afghanistan and the 
historical legacy of U.S. conflict with the Taliban. Perhaps more challengingly, the Biden Administration and many in 
Congress seek to ameliorate humanitarian and economic conditions in Afghanistan, but without taking any action that boosts 
the Taliban’s position or that may be perceived as doing so. Pursuing these policies in tandem may prove complicated given 
the Taliban’s evident aversion to make compromises in response to international pressure and its apparent willingness to 
accept considerable humanitarian and economic suffering as the price of that uncompromising stance. 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
  
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Contents 

Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1 
Background: Taliban Takeover ........................................................................................................ 1 
Taliban Government ........................................................................................................................ 2 
Current and Potential Opposition .............................................................................................. 3 
Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors ....................................................................... 4 
U.S. Policy Impacts of the Taliban’s Return to Power .................................................................... 6 
Counterterrorism ....................................................................................................................... 6 
Afghan Women and Girls .......................................................................................................... 7 
Ongoing Relocations of U.S. Citizens and Certain Afghans ..................................................... 8 
Economic Contraction and Humanitarian Crisis ........................................................................... 10 
U.S. Policy Responses .............................................................................................................. 11 
Congressional Action and Outlook ................................................................................................ 12 

Contacts 

Author Information ........................................................................................................................ 14 

Congressional Research Service 

 
 
 
 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Introduction 
This report provides background information and analysis on developments in Afghanistan and 
implications for U.S. policy, including 

 

 
 

the Taliban’s government and the impact of their rule on terrorist groups, human 
rights, and the ability of U.S. Afghan partners to leave the country;  
regional dynamics; and  
the intersecting humanitarian and economic crises facing the country. 

The report also provides information on legislation and other congressional action related to 
Afghanistan. The challenge at the heart of many U.S. policy debates over which Congress has 
influence (including humanitarian assistance, U.S. sanctions, and the status of U.S.-based central 
bank assets) is how to prioritize and, if possible, reconcile two U.S. interests: supporting the 
Afghan people and refraining from bolstering the Taliban’s rule.  

Background: Taliban Takeover 
The chapter of Afghan history that ended in 2021 arguably began in 2001, when the United 
States, in response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, led a military campaign against 
Al Qaeda and the Afghan Taliban government that harbored it. In the subsequent 20 years, the 
United States suffered thousands of military casualties in Afghanistan, mostly at the hands of the 
rising Taliban insurgency, and Congress appropriated over $146 billion for reconstruction and 
security forces there. During this same period, an elected Afghan government replaced the 
Taliban and, with significant U.S. and international support, made modest but uneven 
improvements in most measures of human development, though Afghanistan remained one of the 
world’s poorest and most corrupt countries.  

At the outset of 2021, the Afghan government was a partner in U.S. counterterrorism efforts, the 
result of nearly 20 years of substantial U.S. and international support, including the deployment 
of hundreds of thousands of troops and the provision of tens of billions of dollars in assistance. 
President Donald Trump had withdrawn all but 2,500 U.S. troops, the lowest U.S. force level 
since 2001, in advance of the full military withdrawal to which the United States agreed in the 
February 2020 U.S.-Taliban agreement.1 U.S. officials committed to continue to provide financial 
support to Afghan forces and expressed confidence about their capabilities vis-a-vis the Taliban, 
while conceding that those forces remained reliant on U.S. support.2 

At the same time, the Taliban were arguably at their strongest since 2001, when they were driven 
from power by U.S., international, and U.S.-backed Afghan forces, having steadily gained 
territory and improved their tactical capabilities over the course of their resilient two-decade 
insurgency. The Afghan government against which the Taliban fought was weakened by deep 
internal divisions, factional infighting, and endemic corruption. 

1 After more than a year of negotiations, U.S. and Taliban representatives signed a bilateral agreement on February 29, 
2020, agreeing to two “interconnected” “guarantees”: the withdrawal of all U.S. and international forces by May 2021, 
and unspecified Taliban action to prevent other groups (including Al Qaeda) from using Afghan soil to threaten the 
United States and its allies. The text of the agreement is available at https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/
02/Agreement-For-Bringing-Peace-to-Afghanistan-02.29.20.pdf. Nonpublic annexes accompanied the agreement. 
2 See House Oversight and Reform Subcommittee on National Security Holds Hearing on Pathway for Peace in 
Afghanistan, CQ Congressional Transcripts, February 19, 2021. 

Congressional Research Service  

1 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Several weeks after President Joseph Biden confirmed that international forces would depart 
Afghanistan by the fall of 2021, Taliban forces began a sweeping advance that captured wide 
swaths of the country. The Taliban’s advance was secured through both combat and negotiation. 
While the Taliban faced stiff, if ultimately unsuccessful, resistance from government forces in 
some areas, others were taken with minimal fighting.3 In many of these areas, the Taliban 
reportedly secured the surrender or departure of government forces (and the handover of their 
weapons) with payments or through the mediation of local elders seeking to avoid bloodshed.4 
The Taliban captured their first provincial capital on August 6, after which the collapse of the 
Afghan government and its security forces accelerated. Afghan President Ashraf Ghani, whose 
seven-year tenure was characterized by electoral crises, pervasive corruption, and the gradual 
deterioration of Afghan military forces, fled the country on August 15 and reportedly remains, as 
of February 2023, in the United Arab Emirates.5 Taliban fighters began entering Kabul that same 
day, taking effective control of the country. 

Taliban Government 
On September 7, 2021, the Taliban announced a “caretaker government” to rule Afghanistan. The 
Taliban refer to their government, as they have for decades referred to themselves, as the Islamic 
Emirate of Afghanistan.6 The Taliban, who did not enact a formal constitution during their 1996-
2001 rule, have said they intend to govern according to Islamic law (sharia) but, according to one 
group of experts, “remain remarkably ambiguous when it comes to the type of Islamic state they 
want to form in Afghanistan.”7 

Haibatullah Akhundzada, Taliban leader since the 2016 killing of his predecessor in a U.S. drone 
strike, holds supreme power as the group’s emir. He has made few reported public appearances 
and only one photograph of him is known to be publicly available.8 Nearly all members of the 
government are former officials from the Taliban’s prior rule or longtime loyalists. All are male, 
the vast majority are ethnic Pashtuns (Afghanistan’s largest ethnic group, which represents a 
plurality of the population), and most are from southern Afghanistan. Over half were, and remain, 
designated for terrorism-related U.S. and/or U.N. sanctions, including the Acting Interior 
Minister, Sirajuddin Haqqani. The U.S. Department of State has for years offered a reward of up 
to $10 million for information leading to the arrest of Haqqani, who is the head of the Haqqani 
Network, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO) that conducted numerous 
attacks against U.S. and other international targets in Afghanistan.  

In the initial days of the transition, some observers had speculated that the Taliban might reach 
out to former Afghan government officials or to others from outside the movement as part of the 

3 “Afghanistan: Taliban continue attacks on three major cities,” BBC, August 1, 2021. 
4 Susannah George, “Afghanistan’s military collapse: Illicit deals and mass desertions,” Washington Post, August 15, 
2021; David Zucchino, “Collapse and Conquest: The Taliban Strategy That Seized Afghanistan,” New York Times, 
August 18, 2021. 
5 Charles Davis, “Afghanistan’s last president, Ashraf Ghani, rejects comparison to Ukraine’s Zelenskyy, says he’s 
‘lived an honorable life,’” Yahoo News, August 23, 2022. 
6 It remains unclear as of Februrary 2023 how or in what sense these “caretaker” positions differ from permanent 
positions. One analyst has described the Taliban’s government during the 1990s as “nominally interim.” “Who Will 
Run the Taliban Government?” International Crisis Group, September 9, 2021. 
7 M. Bashir Mobasher et al., The Constitution and Laws of the Taliban, 1994-2001: Hints from the Past and Options 
for the Future, Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, December 14, 2022. 
8 “Taliban supreme leader addresses major gathering in Kabul,” Al Jazeera, July 1, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

2 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Taliban’s promise to establish an “inclusive government.” The Taliban have not, however, 
reached beyond their own ranks to fill government positions and are reportedly staffing ministries 
with military and/or religious figures with little relevant experience, exacerbating the group’s 
administrative challenges and some internal tensions.9 

Some reports since the Taliban takeover have indicated dissension in the group’s ranks along 
various lines. While the Taliban have a history of effectively managing internal disputes, 
governing Afghanistan presents new and unique challenges to the group’s consensus-based 
decision-making.10 Points of tension reportedly exist between members of the group’s political 
wing (such as Baradar) and its military leaders (such as the Haqqanis) over who deserves the 
most credit for the group’s victory;11 between a leadership that seeks stability and rank and file 
fighters who are struggling to adjust to post-conflict life;12 and between those with different 
ideological perspectives and ethnic identities.13 In a February 2023 speech, Haqqani criticized 
“power monopolization” within the Taliban, prompting other Taliban figures to state that 
criticisms should be voiced privately.14 

Current and Potential Opposition 

While the Taliban’s August 2021 takeover was swift, its triumph, according to many analysts, did 
not reflect massive popular support for the movement so much as a lack of support for the former 
government.15 Many elements of Afghan society, particularly in urban areas, appear to view the 
Taliban with skepticism, fear, or hostility, and small numbers of Afghans have demonstrated 
nonviolently to advocate for their rights and express opposition to the Taliban.16 The Taliban have 
often violently dispersed these protests, and have stifled open non-violent dissent.17 According to 
the UN Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Afghanistan, “There is no significant 
visible political opposition to the Taliban inside Afghanistan,” and exiled officials associated with 
the former government “are fragmented and their statements have decreasing resonance for the 
population inside Afghanistan.”18 

The Taliban face armed opposition from two very different quarters. The first is the National 
Resistance Front (NRF), made up of figures aligned with the former Afghan state. NRF leaders 

9 Zia ur-Rehman and Emily Schmall, “The Taliban have staffing issues. They are looking for help in Pakistan,” New 
York Times, January 13, 2022; Thirteenth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted 
pursuant to resolution 2611 (2021) concerning the Taliban and other associated individuals and entities constituting a 
threat to the peace stability and security of Afghanistan, S/2022/419, May 26, 2022. 
10 Andrew Watkins, “The Taliban one year on,” CTC Sentinel, August 2022. 
11 “Cracks emerge within Taliban as Baradar-led group raises concern over Sirajuddin’s pro-Pashtun stance,” ANI, 
February 15, 2022. 
12 Sabawoon Samim, “New lives in the city: How Taleban have experienced life in Kabul,” Afghanistan Analysts 
Network, February 2, 2023.  
13 Andrew Watkins, “One year later: Taliban reprise repressive rule, but struggle to build a state,” United States 
Institute of Peace, August 17, 2022. 
14 Ayaz Gul, “Top Taliban official’s public criticism reignite internal rift speculation,” Voice of America, February 13, 
2023.  
15 “How the Taliban engineered ‘political collapse’ of Afghanistan,” Reuters, August 17, 2021; Shadi Hamid, 
“Americans never understood Afghanistan like the Taliban did,” Brookings Institution, August 23, 2021. 
16 Barnett Rubin, “Afghanistan under the Taliban: findings on the current situation,” Stimson Center, October 20, 2022. 
17 “Taliban disperses Afghan women’s march for ‘work and freedom,’” Al Jazeera, August 13, 2022. 
18 UNAMA, “Briefing to the United Nations Security Council by the Secretary-General’s Special Representative for 
Afghanistan Roza Otunbayeva,” December 20, 2022.  

Congressional Research Service  

3 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

have appealed for U.S. and international support and have retained Washington, DC-based 
representation.19 They have not won explicit public backing from any foreign countries, perhaps 
due to the Taliban’s relatively stronger military position and closer Taliban ties with regional 
powers, including some that formerly supported Taliban opponents in the 1990s, such as Russia 
and Iran. The NRF has claimed numerous attacks against Taliban fighters, mostly in and around 
the central province of Panjshir, but it is difficult to assess the veracity of such claims, which the 
Taliban dismiss as “propaganda.”20 Still, the NRF does not appear to have either the military 
capabilities or the broad-based public support that would likely be necessary to seriously threaten 
the Taliban’s position.21  

An arguably more potent armed threat to the Taliban is the local Islamic State affiliate (Islamic 
State-Khorasan Province, ISKP, also known as ISIS-K), a longtime Taliban adversary. ISKP has 
opposed the Taliban since its 2015 establishment, viewing the Taliban’s Afghanistan-focused 
nationalist political project as counter to the Islamic State’s universalist vision of a global 
caliphate. Since the Taliban takeover, ISKP’s ranks have swelled to as many as 6,000 fighters 
despite a concerted Taliban offensive.22 In addition to attacks against Afghan civilians (mostly 
targeting Afghanistan’s Shia minority, the Hazaras) and Taliban fighters, ISKP has claimed a 
number of externally-oriented operations, including cross border rocket attacks against 
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, attacks against the Russian and Pakistani embassies in Kabul, and an 
assault on a Kabul hotel frequented by Chinese nationals.23 UN sanctions monitors assess the 
group’s attacks are intended “to portray the Taliban as incapable of providing security” and “to 
undermine the relationship between the Taliban and neighboring countries.”24  

Regional Dynamics: Pakistan and Other Neighbors 
Regional dynamics directly affect developments in Afghanistan, which is landlocked and has 
throughout its history been the object of intervention by its neighbors and other foreign powers. 
Events in Afghanistan also have consequences for those neighbors. 

Pakistan. The neighboring state widely considered most important in this regard is Pakistan, 
which has played an active, and by many accounts destabilizing, role in Afghan affairs for 
decades, including by actively supporting the Taliban during its 1990s rule and much of its 
subsequent insurgency. Many analysts regarded the Taliban takeover at least initially as a triumph 
for Pakistan’s regional policy, pointing to statements of evident support for the takeover from 

19 Ali Maisam Nazary, “What the Taliban really fear,” Foreign Affairs, August 19, 2022. 
20 Zia Ur Rehman, “Afghanistan’s resistance alliance aims to pry Taliban’s grip loose,” Nikkei Asia, June 13, 2022. 
21 Rubin, op. cit.; Vanda Felbab-Brown, “Afghanistan in 2023; Taliban internal power struggles and militancy,” 
Brookings, February 3, 2023. 
22 Thirty-first report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2610 
(2021) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals and entities, S/2023/95, December 30, 2022.  
23 Hazaras comprise 10%-15% of Afghanistan’s population. Since their August 2021 takeover, the Taliban have 
demonstrated a more accepting official stance toward the Hazaras than was the case during their former rule, 
particularly in urban areas, despite some reports of killings and forced displacement in the Hazaras’ historic homelands 
in central Afghanistan in fall 2021. While the Taliban government has not persecuted Hazaras, many Hazaras fault the 
Taliban for not establishing an inclusive government and not stopping the ISKP attacks that have repeatedly targeted 
Hazaras. Nilly Kohzad, “‘It doesn’t matter if we get killed,’ Afghanistan’s Hazaras speak out,” Diplomat, May 27, 
2022.Sudha Ramachandran, “ISKP attacks in Uzbekistan and Tajikistan,” Central Asia-Caucasus Analyst, August 31, 
2022. 
24 Thirty-first report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2610 
(2021) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals and entities, S/2023/95, December 30, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

4 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Pakistani leaders.25 Senior Pakistani officials have held numerous meetings with the new Taliban 
government, both in Kabul and Islamabad, since August 2021. 

However, there are some indications that the Taliban’s return to power may pose challenges for 
Pakistan. The Taliban’s victory may provide a morale and perhaps material boost to Pakistan-
based Islamist terrorist groups, including the so-called Pakistani Taliban (Tehreek-i Taliban-i 
Pakistan, or TTP, a U.S.-designated Foreign Terrorist Organization). TTP attacks against Pakistani 
security forces increased after August 2021, reportedly prompting the Pakistani government to 
seek the Afghan Taliban’s mediation of several ceasefires.26 The TTP has resumed attacks against 
Pakistani targets, including a January 2023 attack (claimed by a TTP faction) that targeted police 
officers and killed over 100. Afghanistan-Pakistan relations are further complicated by the 
presence of over 1 million Afghan refugees in Pakistan, as well as a long-running and ethnically 
tinged dispute over their shared 1,600-mile border, at which Taliban and Pakistani government 
forces intermittently clashed in 2022.27 

Iran. Iran, with which Afghanistan shares its western border, opposed the Taliban’s 1990s rule 
but has maintained relations with the group while emphasizing the need for representation for 
Afghanistan’s ethnic and religious groups with which Iran has close ties (namely Tajiks, who 
speak a variant of Persian, and Hazaras, who are mostly Shia Muslims). Disputes over water 
rights and refugees persist, along with sporadic border clashes.28 

Central Asia. Afghanistan’s Central Asian neighbors (Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan) 
have responded in varying ways to the Taliban’s takeover. The Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan 
governments appear to be prioritizing stability and economic ties, including the planned 
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India (TAPI) natural gas pipeline, and have had official 
engagements with the Taliban. Tajikistan, on the other hand, has opposed the Taliban and offered 
shelter to the anti-Taliban National Resistance Front, a consequence both of Tajikistan’s own 
struggles with Islamist militancy as well as ties with Afghan Tajiks (the country’s second largest 
ethnic group), some of whom oppose the Taliban’s rule.29 

China. The prospect of greater Chinese influence and activity in Afghanistan has attracted some 
congressional attention since the Taliban takeover.30 China, which played a relatively limited role 
in Afghanistan under the former government, made some economic investments in Afghanistan 
(particularly in the development of Afghan minerals and other resources) prior to the Taliban 
takeover, but major projects have not come to fruition due to instability, lack of infrastructure, and 
other limitations.31 Despite concerns about Afghanistan-based Islamist terrorist groups, China has 
signaled tacit acceptance of the Taliban’s rule, with its foreign minister emphasizing in a May 
2022 visit to Kabul that China “respects the independent choices made by the Afghan people.”32 

25 Ishaan Tharoor, “Pakistan’s hand in the Taliban’s victory,” Washington Post, August 18, 2021; Husain Haqqani, 
“Pakista’’s Pyrrhic Victory in Afghanistan,” Foreign Affairs, July 22, 2021. 
26 “Islamist militants present fresh challenge to Pakistan,” Reuters, January 31, 2023. 
27 Rubin, op. cit. Pakistan, the United Nations, and others recognize the 1893 Durand Line as an international boundary, 
but successive Afghan governments, including the Taliban, have not. See Vinay Kaura, “The Durand Line: A British 
Legacy Plaguing Afghan-Pakistani Relations,” Middle East Institute, June 27, 2017. 
28 Christian Hoj Hansen and Halimullah Kousary, “Can Iran get along with the Taliban?” War on the Rocks, June 7, 
2022. 
29 Abubakar Siddique, “Hostilities grow between Taliban and Tajikistan amid border closure, truck seizures,” 
Gandhara, May 19, 2022; Rubin, op. cit. 
30 See, for example,. 
31 Jiayi Zhou et al., “Treading lightly: China’s footprint in a Taliban-led Afghanistan,” SIPRI, November 2022. 
32 Shannon Tiezzi, “China signals it’s back to business as usual with Taliban government,” Diplomat, March 25, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

5 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

U.S. Policy Impacts of the Taliban’s Return to Power 
Renewed Taliban rule in Afghanistan has implications for a number of U.S. policy interests. It has 
created opportunities and challenges for the various terrorist groups that have a presence in 
Afghanistan, and has rendered obsolete former U.S. plans to partner with Afghan authorities to 
counter terrorist threats “over-the-horizon.” Advancing protection of women’s and other human 
rights has been another major U.S. policy goal in Afghanistan since 2001; the Taliban have taken 
numerous actions to roll back those rights since retaking power. U.S. policymakers, including 
many Members of Congress, have also focused on securing the relocation of remaining U.S. 
citizens and Afghans who previously worked for the U.S. government, a halting effort that 
remains ongoing as of February 2023.  

Counterterrorism  

A number of Islamist extremist terrorist groups have for decades operated in Afghanistan, and the 
Taliban have related to them in varying ways. ISKP and Al Qaeda (AQ) are two of the most 
significant of these terrorist groups, and the Taliban’s takeover has affected them differently.  

Long a significant U.S. counterterrorism concern, ISKP has clashed with the Taliban, as 
mentioned above. Under the former U.S.-backed Afghan government, the United States launched 
airstrikes in support of Taliban offensives against ISKP, a rare area of prior U.S.-Taliban 
cooperation.33 In February 2022, the U.S. State Department announced rewards of up to $10 
million each for information related to ISKP leader Sanaullah Ghafari as well as those responsible 
for the August 26, 2021, ISKP attack at Kabul airport that killed and injured hundreds of people, 
including over 30 U.S. service members.34  

While ISKP is seen as more operationally ambitious and capable in Afghanistan than Al Qaeda, 
the July 2022 killing of Al Qaeda leader Ayman al Zawahiri in Kabul attracted considerable 
attention to the issue of AQ-Taliban ties.35 Despite (or perhaps because of) U.S. counterterrorism 
pressure, those ties have persisted for decades.36 The circumstances of Zawahiri’s residence in 
Kabul and what they might reveal about internal Taliban dynamics beyond continued AQ ties 
remain unclear; neither the Taliban nor Al Qaeda officially acknowledged Zawahiri’s death.37 In 
any case, per a February 2023 Department of Defense Inspector General report, Al Qaeda and its 
regional affiliate “probably do not have the intent or capability to conduct directed attacks in the 
U.S. homeland during the next year, and al-Qaeda almost certainly does not have the capability to 
conduct attacks against U..S interests in the region.”38  

33 Wesley Morgan, “Our secret Taliban Air Force,” Washington Post, October 22, 2020. 
34 U.S. Department of State, “New Initiatives in the Fight Against ISIS-K,” February 7, 2022. 
35 CRS Insight IN11976, Al Qaeda Leader Zawahiri Killed in U.S. Drone Strike in Afghanistan, by Clayton Thomas.  
36 Thirtieth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted pursuant to resolution 2610 
(2021) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, U.N. Document S/2022/547, 
released July 15, 2022. 
37 National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan suggested that some elements of the Taliban might not have supported or 
even been aware of Zawahiri’s presence in Kabul, possibly leading to tensions within the Taliban. “The National 
Security Advisor’s very busy week,” NPR, August 4, 2022. 
38 Operation Enduring Sentinel: Lead Inspector General Report to the United States Congress, October 1, 2022-
December 31, 2022, February 14, 2023. In December 2022, the State Department designated three Al Qaeda in the 
Indian Subcontinent (AQIS) leaders as Specially Designated Global Terrorists pursuant to Executive Order 13224. 

Congressional Research Service  

6 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

From the outset of the U.S. withdrawal, U.S. officials said that the United States would maintain 
the ability to combat terrorist threats in Afghanistan such as ISKP and Al Qaeda without a 
military presence on the ground there by utilizing assets based outside of Afghanistan, in what 
U.S. officials describe as an “over-the-horizon” approach.39 With the Taliban in control of 
Afghanistan, the United States has had to alter any plans that had been predicated on the 
continued existence of the former Afghan government and its security forces. U.S. Central 
Command (CENTCOM) Commander General Michael Kurilla described over-the-horizon 
capabilities as “extremely difficult but not impossible” in February 2022 testimony.40 The Biden 
Administration has cited the Zawahiri strike as a demonstration of U.S. over-the-horizon 
capabilities.41 

Afghan Women and Girls42  

The Afghanistan in which the Taliban came to power in August 2021 was in many ways a 
different country than the one they last ruled in 2001. After 2001, women became active 
participants in many parts of Afghan society; protections for them were enshrined in the country’s 
2004 constitution. Though the Taliban takeover has reduced high levels of violence that 
characterized the conflict, a development particularly welcomed by women in rural areas, the 
Taliban’s return to power has been said to have had a significantly negative impact on Afghan 
women and girls overall.43 In a September 2022 report, the UN Special Rapporteur on the 
situation of human rights in Afghanistan said “In no other country have women and girls so 
rapidly disappeared from all spheres of public life, nor are they as disadvantaged in every aspect 
of their lives.”44 

Upon taking power, the Taliban closed the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, which had been a part of 
the former Afghan government, and reinstated the Ministry of Propagation of Virtue and 
Prevention of Vice, which enforced the Taliban’s highly oppressive rule in the 1990s. The 
ministry has issued guidance that seeks to impose new restrictions on Afghan women. Those 
restrictions include a December 2021 prohibition on women driving long distances or flying 
without a male guardian, a May 2022 decree mandating punishments for the male relatives of 
women who do not wear a hijab that fully covers their bodies, and a November 2022 decision to 
ban women from public parks and bath houses.45  

Of particular concern to many U.S. policymakers are Taliban policies toward education for 
Afghan girls. Taliban spokespersons said in early 2022 that girls’ secondary schools, effectively 
shuttered in most of the country since the August 2021 takeover, would reopen with the start of 
the new school year in late March 2022.46 However, on March 23, with some girls already present 
in schools, the Taliban abruptly reversed course and announced that secondary schools for girls 

39 See, for example, Remarks by President Biden on the Way Forward in Afghanistan, White House, April 14, 2021. 
40 See transcript at http://www.cq.com/doc/congressionaltranscripts-6450846?3&search=8TnqSQnx. 
41 The White House, National Security Strategy, October 2022. 
42 See CRS In Focus IF11646, Afghan Women and Girls: Status and Congressional Action, by Clayton Thomas. 
43 Anand Gopal, “The Other Afghan Women,” The New Yorker, September 6, 2021; Susannah George, “A year of 
peace in one of Afghanistan’s deadliest provinces,” Washington Post, August 12, 2022. 
44 United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, “High Commissioner updates the Human 
Rights Council on Afghanistan,” June 15, 2022. 
45 Belquis Ahmadi, “Taliban escalate new abuses against Afghan women, girls,” USIP, October 27, 2022. 
46 Kathy Gannon, “The AP interview: Taliban pledge all girls in schools soon,” Associated Press, January 15, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

7 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

would remain closed, shocking many observers.47 The United States and many other countries 
condemned the decision, and in October 2022, the State Department announced visa restrictions 
on several Taliban figures responsible for the repression of women and girls in Afghanistan.48 
One analysis attributes the change to the advocacy of hardline clerics within the group and 
Akhundzada.49 Other Taliban figures, including both Baradar and the Haqqanis, reportedly 
support secondary education for girls (and some educate their own daughters abroad).50 The 
evidently greater influence of the group’s traditionally conservative leaders, and the 
unwillingness or inability of more pragmatic figures to assert themselves, suggests that external 
actors may have limited leverage over Taliban decisions. Some Afghan women have reportedly 
continued to provide informal education to girls in private “secret schools,” and secondary 
schools for girls have remained open in some areas.51 In December 2022, the Taliban suspended 
women from attending university. 

That same month, the Taliban also banned women from working for national and international 
NGOs, threatening NGOs that do not comply with the suspension of their licenses. In response, 
an estimated 94% of Afghan NGOs fully or partially ceased operations, and 11 U.S. 
implementing partners (such as the International Rescue Committee and the Norwegian Refugee 
Council) suspended operations in Afghanistan.52 The ban, which drew unanimous condemnation 
from the U.N. Security Council and many other quarters, is likely to exacerbate the humanitarian 
crisis in Afghanistan (see below), which disproportionately affects women and girls.53  

Ongoing Relocations of U.S. Citizens and Certain Afghans 

The Taliban’s entry into Kabul on August 15, 2021, triggered the mass evacuation of tens of 
thousands of U.S. citizens (including all diplomatic personnel), partner country citizens, and 
Afghans who worked for international efforts and/or the former Afghan government. U.S. 
officials say that U.S. military forces facilitated the evacuation of 124,000 individuals, including 
5,300 U.S. citizens, as part of Operation Allies Refuge, “the largest air evacuation in US 
history.”54 Since that operation ended on August 30, 2021, the State Department has said that it 
has assisted in the departure of 13,000 Afghans from the country, in addition to 800 U.S. citizens 
and 600 lawful permanent residents as of August 2022.55  

47 Kathy Gannon, “Many baffled by Taliban reneging pledge on girls’ education,” Associated Press, March 24, 2022. 
48 Announcement of Visa Restriction in Response to the Repression of Women and Girls in Afghanistan, U.S. 
Department of State, October 11, 2022. 
49 Ashley Jackson, “The ban on older girls’ education: Taleban conservatives ascendant and a leadership in disarray,” 
Afghanistan Analysts Network, March 29, 2022. 
50 Stephanie Glinski and Ruchi Kumar, “Taliban u-turn over Afghan girls’ education reveals deep leadership 
divisions,” Guardian, March 25, 2022; Sabawoon Samim, “Who gets to go to school? (3): Are Taleban attitudes 
starting to change from within?” Afghanistan Analysts Network, February 7, 2022. 
51 Sudarsan Raghavan, “Where learning is against the law: A secret school for Afghan girls,” Washington Post, 
November 9, 2022; “Afghanistan: Six provinces keep schools open for girls despite nationwide ban,” Amu TV, January 
1, 2023.  
52 “Gender alert no. 3: Out of jobs, into poverty – the impact of the ban on Afghan women working in NGOs,” UN 
Women, January 13, 2023; SIGAR January 30, 2023 Quarterly Report, pp. 60. 
53 “Afghanistan Inter-Agency Rapid Gender Analysis, November 2022,” Gender in Humanitarian Action, December 
22, 2022. 
54 Statement available at https://www.armed-services.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
Printed%2028%20Sep%20SASC%20CJCS%20Written%20Statement.pdf. 
55 Some of those evacuated U.S. citizens reportedly traveled to Afghanistan after August 2021. Department Press 
Briefing—August 15, 2022, U.S. Department of State; Andrew Desiderio et al., “800 Americans evacuated from 

Congressional Research Service  

8 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

U.S. officials have characterized their efforts to secure the relocation of remaining U.S. citizens 
and eligible Afghan partners who seek to leave the country as an “enduring mission.”56 According 
to the State Department, the number of U.S. citizens it has identified in Afghanistan has 
fluctuated in the midst of continued relocations and because of cases in which additional U.S. 
citizens come forward to ask for assistance to leave.57 On April 28, 2022, Secretary Antony 
Blinken said, “There are at present 126, as of a few days ago, American citizens remaining of 
whom 37 seek to leave and that we are assisting.”58 The number of Special Immigrant Visa (SIV) 
applicants, or those potentially eligible for an SIV or other forms of relief, who remain in 
Afghanistan is unclear. In a February 2022 report, an advocacy group for SIV-eligible persons 
stated that 78,000 of the estimated 81,000 SIV applicants in Afghanistan with visa applications 
pending as of August 15, 2021 remain in Afghanistan.59 The State Department has disputed the 
accuracy of this report.60 In May 2022, the State Department reportedly estimated that between 
70,000 and 160,000 Afghans were eligible for SIVs.61 

Some Afghans who seek to relocate reportedly remain in hiding, fearing Taliban retribution. The 
Taliban issued a general amnesty after coming to power, but, according to various accounts, the 
Taliban have carried out reprisals against figures aligned with the former government, including 
hundreds of killings.62  

The Taliban have reportedly interfered with departure flights, including by demanding seats for 
Taliban-selected individuals to work abroad and remit money.63 Secretary Blinken said in late 
April 2022 that the Taliban had allowed freedom of movement to some degree but cautioned that 
there were still limited means of transportation to enable individuals to leave Afghanistan.64 The 
United States has reportedly paid, through Qatar, for tickets on some Afghan airlines that fly to 
Qatar for individuals to leave Afghanistan.65 Other impediments to relocations from Afghanistan 
include logistical issues at Kabul’s international airport (see textbox) and issues with Afghans 
obtaining travel documentation; the Taliban reportedly suspended issuing passports in October 
2022.66 

Afghanistan since Taliban takeover,” Politico, August 14, 2022. 
56 Secretary Antony J. Blinken Remarks to the Press, U.S. Department of State, November 11, 2022.  
57 Department Press Briefing—April 12, 2022, U.S. Department of State. 
58 Testimony of Secretary of State Antony Blinken, in U.S. Congress, House Committee on Appropriations 
Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs, Fiscal Year 2023 Budget Request for the 
Department of State, hearings, 117th Cong., 2nd sess., April 28, 2022. 
59 Association of Wartime Allies, “On The Ground Report—Feb 2022.”  
60 Dan De Luce, “U.S. ‘left behind’ 78,000 Afghan allies in chaotic withdrawal: NGO report,” NBC News, March 1, 
2022. 
61 Alex Thompson and Allie Bice, “Biden’s broken promise to SIV holders,” Politico, May 16, 2022. 
62 Barbara Marcolini et al., “The Taliban promised them amnesty. Then they executed them,” New York Times, April 
12, 2022; Abubakar Siddique, “‘Afghanistan is hell’: Supporters of late Afghan general claim Taliban killings, 
persecution,” Gandhara, November 2, 2022. 
63 Courtney Kube, Dan De Luce and Josh Lederman, “The Taliban have halted all evacuee flights out of Afghanistan 
for the past two weeks,” NBC News, December 23, 2021. 
64 Testimony of Secretary of State Antony Blinken, op. cit. 
65 Dan De Luce and Cortney Kube, “Biden admin relies on Taliban-controlled airline to help Afghans flee 
Afghanistan,” NBC News, June 8, 2022. 
66 “Kabul residents concerned over pause in issuance of passports,” TOLONews, January 2, 2023. 

Congressional Research Service  

9 

 
 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Status of Kabul Airport 
Relocation efforts have been complicated by the status of Kabul’s international airport. After the final departure of 
U.S. forces, Qatar and Turkey worked to make the airport—which sustained damage to its runways, radar system, 
and other components during the U.S. evacuation effort and withdrawal—operational. As of February 2023, some 
domestic and regional airlines are carrying out flights from Kabul airport, but major foreign carriers have yet to 
resume operations. Despite a preliminary December 2021 deal with Qatar and Turkey to operate several airports 
in Afghanistan, the Taliban in September 2022 announced that they had reached a seemingly similar deal with the 
United Arab Emirates to operate three airports, including Kabul’s.67 

Economic Contraction and Humanitarian Crisis 
The Taliban’s return to power has exacerbated one of the worst humanitarian crises in the world 
in Afghanistan, long one of the world’s poorest and most aid-dependent countries. A number of 
U.S. policy actions, including the cut-off of international development assistance, U.S. and 
international sanctions on the Taliban, and the U.S. hold on Afghanistan’s central bank assets, 
appear relevant to the economic breakdown that underlies the humanitarian crisis.  

The United States and other international donors provided billions of dollars a year to support the 
former Afghan government, financing over half of its $6 billion annual budget and as much as 
80% of total public expenditures.68 Much of that development assistance halted with the Taliban’s 
August 2021 takeover, leading the country’s economy to contract by as much as 35% in 2021 and 
2022.69 The United Nations Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Afghanistan said in 
December 2022 that “the Taliban’s economic management has been more effective than 
expected,” citing lower levels of corruption, higher revenue collection, and the relative stability of 
Afghanistan’s currency over the past year. Still, the economy remains reliant on international 
donors to inject liquidity into the economy, including the United Nations, which has delivered 
$1.8 billion in cash between December 2021 and January 2023 for humanitarian operations and 
salary payments.70  

The economic contraction has exacerbated what was already a severe humanitarian crisis in 
Afghanistan prior to August 2021, due primarily to conflict, drought, and the COVID-19 
pandemic. Indicators suggest that conditions have worsened further since August 2021: the World 
Food Programme asserted in January 2023 that “Afghanistan continues to face the highest 
prevalence of insufficient food consumption globally,” with 90% of Afghans reporting not having 
enough to eat.71 The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports that 
humanitarian partners provided 26.1 million Afghans with at least one form of assistance in 2022, 
and that “the outlook remains grim” given projected droughts and higher commodity prices.72  

67 Charlotte Seet, “UAE civil aviation authority to operate Afghanistan air traffic control,” Simple Flying, September 8, 
2022. 
68 SIGAR January 2023 Quarterly Report, pp. 69-71.  
69 “Afghanistan: Overview,” World Bank, October 7, 2022. 
70 Ibid. 
71 “Afghanistan Situation Report, January 18, 2023” World Food Program, January 2023. 
72 UN OCHA, “Humanitarian Response Plan 2022,” February 6, 2023. 

Congressional Research Service  

10 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

U.S. Policy Responses 

The United States has provided over $1.1 billion in humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan and 
neighboring countries since the Taliban takeover.73 While such assistance plays a crucial role in 
averting further humanitarian suffering, it is different in many ways from former U.S. security, 
development, and stabilization assistance, which averaged over $5 billion annually between 
FY2019 and FY2021. In addition to providing some humanitarian assistance, those funds paid the 
salaries of Afghan soldiers and civil servants, supported key government services, and ultimately 
made up a large portion of Afghanistan’s economy. The Biden Administration’s FY2023 budget 
request proposes $345 million for health, education, and other forms of assistance in Afghanistan; 
the lack of a U.S. diplomatic presence in Afghanistan may complicate or constrain the 
implementation and/or oversight of U.S. funding. 

Beyond assistance, the two U.S. policy areas that appear to have the greatest relevance to the 
economic and humanitarian situation are sanctions and the ongoing U.S. hold on Afghanistan’s 
central bank reserves. U.S. sanctions on the Taliban (in place in various forms since 1999) 
remain, but it is unclear to what extent they are affecting humanitarian conditions in 
Afghanistan.74 Since the Taliban’s takeover, the U.S. Department of the Treasury has issued 
several general licenses stating that U.S. sanctions on the Taliban do not prohibit the provision of 
assistance to Afghanistan and authorizing various humanitarian and commercial transactions.75 
Still, the continued existence of sanctions might lead financial institutions or other actors to “de-
risk” Afghanistan by refusing to engage in the country rather than risk violation of U.S. sanctions. 
For more on U.S. sanctions on the Taliban, see CRS In Focus IF12039, Afghanistan: 
Humanitarian Crisis, Economic Collapse, and U.S. Sanctions. 

The Biden Administration’s hold on the U.S.-based assets of the Afghan central bank (DAB) has 
also drawn scrutiny. Imposed days after the Taliban entered Kabul to prevent the Taliban from 
accessing the funds, the Taliban and some foreign leaders have urged the United States to release 
the hold on those assets, which total around $7 billion.76 On February 11, 2022, the Biden 
Administration announced that it would “seek to facilitate access of $3.5 billion [of the assets] ... 
for the benefit of the Afghan people,” pending ongoing litigation related to the September 11, 
2001, attacks.77 In September 2022, the Administration announced the establishment of an 
“Afghan Fund” (based in Switzerland) to “make targeted disbursements of that $3.5 billion to 
help provide greater stability to the Afghan economy.”78 The fund’s four member Board of 
Trustees met for the first time in November 2022.79 It has not, as of February 2023, made any 
disbursements. In December 2022, the DAB approved a USAID-funded third party assessment of 
the central bank’s anti-money laundering/countering the financing of terrorism controls.80  

73 See SIGAR January 2023 Quarterly Report 
74 “Economic causes of Afghanistan’s humanitarian crisis,” Human Rights Watch, August 4, 2022. 
75 See Treasury Department Fact Sheet, December 22, 2021, at https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/
afg_factsheet_20211222_nu.pdf.  
76 CRS In Focus IF12052, Afghanistan Central Bank Reserves. 
77 See Executive Order at https://home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/afghanistan_bank_eo.pdf. 
78 The United States and Partners Announce Establishment of Fund for the People of Afghanistan, U.S. Department of 
State, September 14, 2022. See also SIGAR Quarterly Report, October 30, 2022, pp. 112-115. 
79 Readout of Fund for the Afghan People Board Meeting, U.S. Department of the Treasury, November 21, 2022. 
80 SIGAR January 2023 Quarterly Report. 

Congressional Research Service  

11 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Congressional Action and Outlook 
The Taliban’s takeover attracted intense congressional and public scrutiny. U.S. public attention 
appears to have since decreased, but Afghanistan remains the subject of congressional 
engagement as some Members seek to account for the evident failure of U.S. efforts and grapple 
with the reality of the Taliban’s renewed rule.81 

Congressional oversight of Afghanistan has been robust. Congressional committees held at least 
ten hearings specifically on Afghanistan in the weeks after the Taliban’s takeover.82 Senate 
Foreign Relations minority staff released an assessment of the August 2021 evacuation in 
February 2022, and the House Foreign Affairs Committee then-ranking member produced an 
interim report on the withdrawal in August 2022.83 In addition, Congress established the 
Afghanistan War Commission (AWC, Section 1094 of the FY2022 National Defense 
Authorization Act, NDAA, P.L. 117-81) charged with examining the war and developing “a series 
of lessons learned and recommendations for the way forward” in a final report to be issued within 
three years. Per its website, the Commission “plans to formally convene in early 2023.”84 

In the 118th Congress, two House committees have requested further information from the 
Administration related to the U.S. military withdrawal from Afghanistan and related contingency 
plans.85 One of them, the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said in its February 2023 
Authorization and Oversight Plan that it will “comprehensively review policy, decision-making, 
planning, and execution related to the August 2021 withdrawal from Afghanistan,” as well as 
“examine U.S. policy toward Afghanistan.”86 

In shaping U.S. policy toward Afghanistan, Congress may consider a number of options. 

  Congress may examine how U.S. assistance, and conditions thereon, may affect 
Taliban actions, including with regard to women’s rights more broadly and the 
ability of Afghan girls to attend school in particular, to inform congressional 
consideration of the Administration’s budget request and action on FY2023 
appropriations; 

81 Google Trends, “Afghanistan,” “8/31/2021–2/24/2023,” accessed February 24, 2023. 
82 Hearings on Afghanistan include those held by House Foreign Affairs Committee (September 13, 2021, with 
Secretary Blinken); Senate Foreign Relations Committee (September 14, 2021, with Secretary Blinken); Senate Armed 
Services Committee (September 28, 2021, with Secretary Austin, General Milley, and General McKenzie); House 
Armed Services Committee (September 29, 2021, with Secretary Austin, General Milley, and General McKenzie); 
Senate Armed Services Committee (September 30, 2021, with outside witnesses); House Foreign Affairs Committee 
(October 5, 2021, with former U.S. officials); Senate Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Committee (October 5, 
2021, with outside witnesses); House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on International Development, International 
Organizations, and Global Corporate Impact (October 6, 2021, with SIGAR); Senate Armed Service Committee 
(October 26, 2021, with DOD witnesses); and Senate Foreign Relations Committee (November 17, 2021, with former 
U.S. officials). 
83 Left Behind: A Brief Assessment of the Biden Administration’s Strategic Failures during the Afghanistan Evacuation, 
United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Minority Report, February 2022; House Republican Interim 
Report: A “Strategic Failure:” Assessing the Administration’s Afghanistan Withdrawal, Congressman Michael 
McCaul, August 14, 2022. 
84 Afghanistan War Commission.  
85 “Chairman McCaul fires back at Biden Admin, renews oversight request on Afghanistan withdrawal,” House 
Foreign Affairs Committee, January 12, 2023; February 17, 2023 letters from Chairman James Comer et al. to White 
House National Security Affairs Director Jake Sullivan, Secretary of State Blinken, Secretary of Homeland Security 
Mayorkas, USAID Administrator Power, Secretary of Defense Austin and Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Milley. 
86 House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Authorization and Oversight Plan, 118th Congress, adopted February 8, 2023. 

Congressional Research Service  

12 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

  Congress may request or mandate additional information from the Administration 
about the number and status of U.S. citizens and Afghan partners who remain in 
Afghanistan and about the status of U.S. efforts to secure their relocation, 
including resources devoted to those efforts, obstacles to further relocations, and 
Administration plans to overcome those obstacles; 

  Congress may examine the impact of U.S. sanctions on the designated 

entities/individuals, the Afghan economy, and Afghan society more broadly, 
including by requiring reporting thereon from the Administration and/or the 
Government Accountability Office, to assess whether they are achieving their 
intended objectives; and 

  Congress may examine the impact and efficacy of oversight of previous U.S. 
efforts in Afghanistan to shape future U.S. policy efforts, congressional 
authorizing and appropriations measures, and oversight mechanisms (including 
those intended to oversee U.S. assistance to other foreign partners, such as 
Ukraine). Relevant reports from the AWC and the Department of Defense (and 
the federally funded research and development center with whom the Department 
contracts, as directed by Section 1323 of P.L. 117-81) are due to be submitted 
within approximately one and two years, respectively. 

Going forward, U.S. policy, including congressional action, could be influenced or constrained by 
a number of factors, including 

 

 

a dearth of information about dynamics in Afghanistan, given the lack of U.S. 
diplomats and other on the ground observers and Taliban-imposed limitations on 
journalists; and 

the historical legacy of U.S. conflict with the Taliban, which may make 
cooperation with the group, even to advance U.S. policy priorities, politically 
difficult. 

Perhaps more fundamental is the challenge of how to pursue U.S. policy priorities that may be 
difficult to reconcile: stabilizing Afghanistan and providing support to Afghans while avoiding 
actions that might benefit the Taliban. While providing humanitarian aid may be sufficient to 
stave off mass casualties, it is unlikely to sustainably improve economic conditions. Financial 
assistance could improve the Afghan economy, ameliorating the humanitarian situation, but 
comes with the risk of diversion of some funds or broader benefits to the Taliban. In considering 
Administration budget requests, Members of Congress may weigh these and other options, 
including conditions on U.S. assistance. 

The Taliban have called for international recognition, assistance, and sanctions relief, but since 
returning to power they have not shown a willingness to make compromises on important issues 
to obtain them. Nearly every country, U.S. partners and adversaries alike, has urged the Taliban to 
form a more inclusive government, and many countries have joined the United States in calling 
for the group to lift restrictions on women and girls and break ties with terrorist groups. In 
response, the Taliban have stalled, equivocated, and ultimately either ignored or rejected outright 
these calls. Foreign policy tools that the United States has traditionally used as leverage may not 
be as effective in Afghanistan as in some other contexts.87 

87 See, for example, Daniella Cheslow, “Frozen Afghan funds have done little to sway Taliban,” Wall Street Journal, 
February 8, 2023; Marvin Weinbaum, “America can’t change the Taliban,” National Interest, August 15, 2022; Kate 
Bateman, “A year after the Taliban takeover: what’s next for the U.S. in Afghanistan?” U.S. Institute of Peace, August 
11, 2022. 

Congressional Research Service  

13 

 
 
                                                 
Afghanistan: Background and U.S. Policy 

Author Information 

Clayton Thomas 
Specialist in Middle Eastern Affairs 

Disclaimer 

This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan 
shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and 
under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other 
than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in 
connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not 
subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in 
its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or 
material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to 
copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

Congressional Research Service  

R45122 · VERSION 57 · UPDATED 

14 

 
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
