Costa Rica: An Overview

Costa Rica historically has been a bastion of stability in 
Central America and often has served as a key U.S. partner 
for advancing policy goals in the region. The 118th 
Congress sought to reinforce U.S.-Costa Rican security 
cooperation by appropriating security assistance for the 
country and authorizing the U.S. Armed Forces to engage 
in certain training with Costa Rican security forces. The 
119th Congress may monitor U.S.-Costa Rican efforts to 
address shared challenges, such as transnational crime and 
unauthorized migration, as well as potential opportunities, 
such as collaboration on supply chains in strategic sectors. 

Political Situation 
Costa Rica has sustained civilian democratic governance 
since 1949, when the country adopted a new constitution in 
the aftermath of a short civil war. The center-left (now 
centrist) National Liberation Party (PLN) and a center-right 
opposition that ultimately became the Social Christian 
Unity Party (PUSC) dominated postwar politics. In the 
early 2000s, however, corruption scandals and public 
dissatisfaction contributed to the collapse of the two-party 
system. Alternative political parties have emerged since 
then, such as the center-left Citizens’ Action Party (PAC), 
which won the 2014 and 2018 presidential elections, and 
current President Rodrigo Chaves’s center-right Social 
Democratic Progress Party (PPSD). 

Chaves, a former Costa Rican finance minister and World 
Bank official, began his four-year presidential term in May 
2022 after defeating former President José María Figueres 
(1994-1998) of the PLN 53%-47% in a runoff election. In 
his inauguration speech, Chaves promised to “rebuild” the 
country and laid out his top priorities, which included 
reducing the cost of living, generating increased 
employment, and combatting corruption and crime. Among 
other actions in office, Chaves has reduced import tariffs on 
rice—a staple of the Costa Rican diet—and signed into law 
legislation intended to enhance the country’s ability to 
combat organized crime. Chaves also has declared national 
emergencies in response to challenges including 
cyberattacks and migration flows, enabling his government 
to draw on additional funding and authorities. 

Chaves has struggled to advance other proposals through 
Costa Rica’s fragmented unicameral Legislative Assembly, 
in which his PPSD holds 10 of 57 seats. He has 
occasionally attempted to go around the legislature and 
govern through public referendums, but Costa Rica’s courts 
have blocked those efforts. Although Chaves’s clashes with 
other branches of government have led some analysts to 
express concerns about his respect for the separation of 
powers, many Costa Ricans appear to support Chaves’s 
approach to governance. In a November 2024 University of 
Costa Rica poll, 63% of Costa Ricans rated his performance 
positively. Costa Rica’s constitution prohibits individuals 
from serving consecutive presidential terms, and it is 

Updated March 7, 2025

unclear who Chaves may support in the next election, 
scheduled for February 2026. 

Figure 1. Costa Rica at a Glance 

Sources: CRS Graphics, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos; 
International Monetary Fund; Trade Data Monitor. 

Economic and Social Conditions 
Costa Rica pursued state-led economic development 
throughout much of the 20th century but began to adopt a 
more market-oriented economic strategy in the 1980s. Since 
that time, it has attracted a cluster of high-tech 
manufacturers, including semiconductor producers and 
medical device companies, and has developed a dynamic 
tourism sector, contributing to the diversification of the 
country’s once predominantly agricultural economy. 
According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, services—
including tourism—now comprise about two-thirds of gross 
domestic product (GDP), while high-tech manufacturing 
accounts for a plurality of Costa Rican exports and much of 
the foreign direct investment in Costa Rica. 

The Chaves administration’s economic policy has focused 
primarily on strengthening the government’s finances. It 
successfully completed two agreements with the 
International Monetary Fund, which provided the Costa 
Rican government with about $2.3 billion in financing 
between 2021 and 2024 to implement policies intended to 
stabilize Costa Rica’s debt burden, support economic 
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, and address 
climate risks. Costa Rica’s public debt declined from nearly 
68% of GDP in 2021 to below 60% of GDP in 2024 due to 
a mix of factors, including the Chaves administration’s tight 
fiscal policy, tax and public employment reforms enacted 
by the previous government, and annual economic growth 
rates averaging more than 5%. 

Strong economic growth also has contributed to reductions 
in poverty and unemployment. Nevertheless, Costa Rica’s 
level of income inequality remains above the Latin 
American average, according to the UN Economic 
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

 
 
U.S.-Costa Rican Relations 
Successive U.S. Administrations have worked with Costa 
Rica to strengthen economic ties, advance regional foreign 
policy goals, and address shared security concerns. During 
a February 2025 visit to Costa Rica, Secretary of State 
Marco Rubio characterized Costa Rica as a “model” for the 
region and commended the country’s cooperation on 
cybersecurity, counternarcotics, and migration. Secretary 
Rubio stated that he had issued waivers to allow continued 
U.S. support for some security programs amid the Trump 
Administration’s 90-day pause on U.S. foreign assistance; it 
is unclear if or how the subsequent cancellation of 
thousands of unspecified U.S. assistance awards and 
contracts may affect programs in Costa Rica. Congress may 
monitor the Administration’s approach to U.S.-Costa Rican 
relations and assess whether and how to continue shaping 
bilateral ties with appropriations and other legislation. 

Trade and Investment Ties 
The United States and Costa Rica are parties to the 
Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free 
Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR; P.L. 109-53), which was 
signed in 2004 and entered into force for Costa Rica in 
2009. U.S.-Costa Rican trade in goods reached a record 
high of $21.3 billion in 2024, according to U.S. Census 
Bureau data. U.S. goods exports to Costa Rica totaled $9.7 
billion, led by mineral fuels, electrical machinery, and 
medical instruments and parts. U.S. goods imports from 
Costa Rica totaled $11.6 billion, led by medical instruments 
and parts, electrical machinery, and fruit. 

U.S. imports of electronic integrated circuits from Costa 
Rica rose from $121 million in 2021 to $1.2 billion in 2024. 
This increase coincided with U.S. efforts to create stronger, 
more secure global semiconductor supply chains, drawing 
on incentives enacted in the CHIPS Act of 2022 (P.L. 117-
167, Division A). In 2023, Intel announced plans to invest 
$1.2 billion in Costa Rica by 2025. The U.S.-based 
technology company had previously closed a microchip 
assembly and testing facility in Costa Rica in 2014, moving 
those operations to China, Malaysia, and Vietnam. 
According to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, the 
accumulated stock of U.S. foreign direct investment in 
Costa Rica was $3.8 billion in 2023, with 53% invested in 
manufacturing. 

Security Cooperation 
Costa Rica’s institutions have proven more resilient than 
those of its Central American neighbors, but the country has 
experienced an increase in organized crime and violence 
over the past decade. Homicides rose from 471 (9.9 per 
100,000 residents) in 2014 to 880 (16.6 per 100,000) in 
2024. Costa Rican authorities have linked much of the 
violence to drug trafficking organizations, which use the 
country as a transit and storage point for South American 
cocaine destined for the United States and Europe. 
Domestic drug consumption—including a nascent fentanyl 
market—also has fueled turf battles among criminal 
organizations, according to the U.S. State Department. 

Congress has appropriated U.S. foreign assistance for Costa 
Rica to help the country combat transnational crime and 
other security threats. For example, in the explanatory 
statement accompanying the Department of State, Foreign 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

Operations, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 
2024 (P.L. 118-47, Division F), Congress designated at 
least $46 million in bilateral and regional security 
assistance for Costa Rica. Such assistance has included 
equipment, training for security and justice sector 
personnel, and support for crime prevention programs. 

The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) has provided 
additional equipment and capacity-building support to 
Costa Rica using its security cooperation authorities (e.g., 
10 U.S.C. §333). The Servicemember Quality of Life 
Improvement and National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2025 (P.L. 118-159, §1209) authorizes the 
general purpose forces of the U.S. Armed Forces to engage 
in training with Costa Rican security forces through 2030. 
Costa Rica abolished its military following the country’s 
1948 civil war but has several security forces that perform 
national security functions, including the public force, air 
surveillance service, and national coast guard service. 

Cybersecurity has emerged as a key area of bilateral 
cooperation since 2022, when a Russia-based hacker group 
carried out a series of ransomware attacks against the Costa 
Rican government. In 2023, the U.S. State Department and 
DOD announced commitments totaling nearly $35 million 
to help Costa Rica strengthen its cyber defenses. The same 
year, the Chaves administration limited participation in 
Costa Rica’s fifth-generation (5G) telecommunications 
network to firms from countries that endorse the Budapest 
Convention on Cybercrime, effectively excluding 
companies from China. 

Migration and Refugee Flows 
As a comparatively prosperous and stable country, Costa 
Rica has long served as a destination for migrants and 
asylum-seekers from other parts of Latin America. The 
country has experienced a surge in asylum requests over the 
past decade, primarily due to the ongoing political crisis in 
neighboring Nicaragua. According to the UN Refugee 
Agency, nearly 248,000 forcibly displaced people resided 
in Costa Rica in 2024, including 197,000 Nicaraguans.  

Other migrants pass through Costa Rican territory on their 
way to the United States. According to the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), an estimated 325,000 
migrants entered Costa Rica in 2024, with Venezuelans 
appearing to account for the majority. Costa Rica has 
worked with the U.S. government to screen those transiting 
the country and address potential security threats. 

In February 2025, the United States transferred 200 
unauthorized Asian migrants to Costa Rica to await 
repatriation to their countries of origin. Congress could 
inquire about the details of this arrangement, which the 
Costa Rican government asserts is funded by the United 
States with implementation support from IOM. According 
to the U.S. State Department, the United States has 
provided nearly $90 million to humanitarian organizations 
since 2018 to support migrants and refugees in Costa Rica. 

Peter J. Meyer, Specialist in Latin American and Canadian 
Affairs   

IF10908

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

Costa Rica: An Overview 

Disclaimer 
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10908 · VERSION 12 · UPDATED 

 
 
 
