 INSIGHTi 

An Overview of S. 394, GENIUS Act of 2025 

March 10, 2025 

On February 4, 2025, Senator Bill Hagerty introduced S. 394, the Guiding and Establishing National 
Innovation for U.S. Stablecoins Act of 2025, or GENIUS Act, which would establish a regime to regulate 
stablecoins. Currently, existing state and federal laws and regulations are applied to aspects of the 
stablecoin industry based on the nature of activities and individual stablecoin features.  

The bill’s proposed regulatory framework and licensing process are described below. 

Requirements for Issuing Payment Stablecoins  
S. 394 defines payment stablecoins as digital assets, issued for payment or settlement and redeemable at a 
predetermined fixed amount (e.g., $1), that hold assets in reserve and that can be liquidated only to 
redeem the stablecoins. Issuers would be required to hold at least one dollar of permitted reserves for 
every one dollar of stablecoins. The bill would limit permitted reserves to coins and currency; insured 
deposits held at banks and credit unions, including foreign banks; short-dated Treasury bills; repurchase 
agreements (“repos”) and reverse repos backed by Treasury bills; money market funds invested in certain 
of these assets; or central bank reserve deposits. Additionally, the bill would require federal and state 
regulators, respectively, to issue tailored capital, liquidity, and risk management rules for federal and state 
stablecoin issuers, but exempts stablecoin issuers from the regulatory capital standards applied to 
traditional banks. 

Issuers would be required to establish and disclose stablecoin redemption procedures and to issue periodic 
reports of outstanding stablecoins and reserve composition. The bill would require the reports be 
“examined”—as opposed to audited—by a registered public accounting firm, and it would require that 
issuers’ executives certify the reports. Issuers would be subject to the Bank Secrecy Act. 

Applications and Regulatory, Supervisory, and 
Enforcement Regimes 
The bill would create a federal or state regulatory option for stablecoin issuers, who could be subsidiaries 
of insured depository institutions (IDIs, e.g., banks and credit unions) or nonbanks (the bill does not 
restrict nonbanks to financial firms). The bill would allow any issuers with fewer than $10 billion 

Congressional Research Service 

https://crsreports.congress.gov 

IN12522 

CRS INSIGHT 
Prepared for Members and  
Committees of Congress 

 
  
 
 
 
 
Congressional Research Service 

2 

outstanding stablecoins to be subject to a state regulatory regime, provided that the state regulatory 
regime was “substantially similar” to its federal counterpart. State regulatory agencies would be required 
to certify annually to the U.S. Treasury that their regime meets these criteria. The bill would clarify that 
payment stablecoins are not securities. 

Various sections of the bill appear to provide federal regulators with rulemaking authority over federally 
regulated stablecoin issuers and state regulators with rulemaking authority over state-regulated issuers. 

Subsidiaries of Insured Depository Institutions and Credit Unions, and 
Nonbank Federal Issuers  

Stablecoin issuers that are the subsidiaries of insured depository institutions would be required to apply 
to, receive approval from, and be supervised by and subject to enforcement authority of the same federal 
banking regulator as that of the IDI for compliance with the bill’s requirements. (The bill appears to 
provide federal and state IDIs the option of applying with federal regulators but opting to be subject to 
state regulation, supervision, and enforcement.) 

A nonbank stablecoin issuer could apply for state or federal approval. Under the federal option, nonbank 
issuers would be regulated and supervised “exclusively” by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
(OCC). Federal nonbank stablecoin issuers would be required to file reports with, and may be subject to 
exams by, the OCC, to evaluate issuer financial condition and nature of operations; the risks to safety and 
soundness of the entity and financial stability derived by issuance; and the systems used for controlling 
these risks. 

Applications would be evaluated on whether the stablecoin issuer has the financial condition and 
resources to meet the baseline requirements (described above). An application not acted on within 120 
days would be deemed approved. Regulators would have to justify denied applications and permit an 
applicant to request an appeal hearing and to reapply.  

The regulators would be authorized to stop a previously approved issuer from issuing stablecoins or issue 
civil money penalties if the regulator were to determine that the issuer has violated the requirements of 
the bill or any written condition imposed by the regulator. 

State-Qualified Payment Stablecoin Issuers 

State regulators would “have supervisory, examination, and enforcement authority over a State qualified 
payment stablecoin issuer of such State.” However, the bill would give state regulators the option of 
ceding these authorities to the Federal Reserve (Fed). Also, the bill would allow the Fed or OCC to take 
enforcement actions against issuers that select the state option in “exigent” circumstances.  

State Option  

The bill would permit all issuers under the $10 billion threshold to opt in to a state regulatory regime, 
provided it is similar to the federal framework. This would put the stablecoin subsidiaries of IDIs beyond 
the jurisdiction of their primary federal regulator, with the exception of the application requirement. 
Issuers that grow above the $10 billion threshold would be required to “transition” to the federal 
regulatory regime of the appropriate regulator. Subsidiaries of state IDIs transitioning to the federal 
regime would be regulated by the Fed (as opposed to their primary regulator); subsidiaries of federal IDIs 
and nonbanks transitioning would be regulated by the OCC. 

  
Congressional Research Service 

3 

Other Provisions 
The bill would establish rules for stablecoin asset and reserve custodians, which could be issuers or non-
issuers. Securities and Exchange Commission- and Commodity Futures Trading Commission-supervised 
entities would be permitted to custody reserves. It would also prohibit custodians from comingling their 
own funds with customers’ funds, with exceptions. The bill would permit banks to custody and reserve 
assets, use blockchains, and issue tokenized deposits.  

Out-of-state stablecoin issuers would be subject to a host state’s consumer protection laws.  

The bill would grant stablecoin holders priority over all other claims against the issuer in bankruptcy. 

The bill would require that the U.S. Treasury conduct a study on endogenously collateralized stablecoins 
(colloquially called algorithmic stablecoins) that rely on the value of another digital asset to maintain the 
fixed price. 

The bill would also permit the Fed, in conjunction with Treasury, to establish “reciprocal” agreements 
with jurisdictions with stablecoin regulatory regimes substantially similar to those of the United States. 

Author Information 

Paul Tierno 
Analyst in Financial Economics 

Disclaimer 

This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff 
to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of 
Congress. Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of 
information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. 
CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United 
States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, 
as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the 
permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material. 

IN12522 · VERSION 1 · NEW 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
